Ek Bharat - Shreshtha Bharat
Vibrant and Participatory Democracy
Empowered and Inspired People
Inclusive and Sustainable Development
Quality lifein Villages and Cities
Basic Amenitiesto All
Flourishing Agriculture
Productive Youth
Involved Women
Robust physical and social Infrastructure
Innovative and Technologically driven Society
Globally competitive Economy
Brand built on Quality
Strong, Effective and FuturisticInstitutions
Open, Transparent and Systems-based Government
Pro-active, Pro-people Good Governance
To build a Modern : the best foundationis our own Culture;
the best tool our own hands; and the best material our ownaspirations
Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas

1
Preface
is the most ancient civilization of the world and has always been looked upon by the world as a
land of wealth and wisdom. has been credited to have developed, apart from philosophy and
mathematics, science and technology of a very high order, which had attracted scholars from all over
the world. Al-Andalusi, a Spanish scholar in the 11th Century, in his monumental work 'Tabaqat alUmam' had discussed the state of science in different countries. He writes, "The first nation to have
cultivated science is … is known for wisdom of its people. Over many centuries all the kings
of the past have recognized the ability of ns in all branches of knowledge." Andalusi further states,
"ns, as known to all nations for many centuries, are the metal (essence) of wisdom, the source of
fairness and objectivity. They are the people of sublime pensiveness, universal apologues, and useful
and rare inventions."
's contribution to the march of civilization goes back to several thousand years before the Christian
era. From the Vedas to Upanishads and Gautam - the Buddha and Mahavira - the 24th Jain Tirthankara
and then to Kautilya and Chandra Gupta and down up to the eighteenth century, was respected
for its flourishing economy, trade, commerce and culture. It had an inter outreach from Korea
to Arabia, from Bamiyan to Borobudur and beyond. Before the advent of Britishers, n goods were
interly recognized for their quality and craftsmanship. had a much bigger role and presence
in industry and manufacturing than any nation in Europe or Asia. It had a well-developed banking
system and equally renowned businessmen, along with its financiers, who were contributing to create
a flourishing and progressive economy. According to Sunderland, was also one of the greatest
shipbuilding nations and consequently had an access to inter markets. n prosperity held
the world in thrall. It was this wealth which attracted the foreigners - from Alexander to the Britishers.
Historical records establish the level of progress and prosperity attained by before the advent of
the Europeans. n advancement in mathematics, astronomy, physics and chemistry along with
the biological sciences has been well recognized. was a land of abundance, prosperity, affluence,
a land of sharing and caring living in perfect harmony and peace with the nature. From ancient times
almost all religions practiced in different parts of the world, have existed peacefully in and will
continue to do so. thus provides the most ennobling experience in spiritual co-existence.
recognizes that no nation could chart out its domestic or foreign policies unless it has a clear
understanding about itself, its history, its roots, its strengths and failings. In a highly mobile and
globalized world, it is imperative for a nation to know its roots that provide sustenance to its people.
n freedom struggle, which was inspired by Tilak, Gandhi, Aurobindo, Patel, Bose and others, had
a clear vision of the civilizational consciousness of . These leaders had directed the freedom
movement, keeping the n ways and thoughts in the centre of their action. They had a vision to
reconstruct the political and economic institutions of as a continuum of civilizational consciousness,
which made one country, one people, and one Nation.
After achieving independence, the leaders at the helm of affairs lost the spirit and the vision, which the
freedom movement had evoked. They discarded the vision and adopted the institutional framework of
administration created by the Britishers which was quite alien to 's world-view. It is unfortunate
that these leaders could not comprehend 's inner vitality, which was the main force responsible for
's survival despite several attacks and prolonged foreign rule and thus, failed to rekindle the spirit
of .
2
Even after nearly seven decades of our independence, the country has not been able to discover its
innate vitality, the sense of time and the will to act. As a result, in spite of being the oldest civilization
and a young republic, we are engulfed by a multi-dimensional crisis. A crisis, which has encompassed
all walks of life. The rising disparities, social and communal divide and terrorism leading to a fractured
society, are worsening the situation rapidly. The present crisis is the result of this confusion and
disconnect from the seekings and sensibilities of the people. This is worse confounded by the weak
and spineless leadership of the UPA Government. The tragedy is further heightened by their failure to
diagnose the malady and find the remedy. Instead of creating a socio-economic and political paradigm
of governance drawn from the civilizational consciousness of , the leaders tried to follow whatever
was being practiced in this or that western country.
Thus, we have wasted more than half of a century. Many other countries, even with smaller size and
lesser resources, have surpassed us in development parameters. Another reason for this is that the
Governance in these decades was marred by lack of trust, leading to excessive controls. It was also
marked  by  lack  of  openness  in  Government  and  lack  of  people's  participation.  This  has  led  to
concentration of power in a few hands and lack of transparency breeding corruption and nepotism on
a massive scale. The so-called 'liberalization' came in 1990s, but it was half-hearted. It didn't work
because the rest of the eco-system remained the same. However, the beginning of the 21st century
showed some light under the NDA rule. started being reckoned as an economic superpower. The
six-year rule of NDA had given the Nation many firsts, building an image in the Inter community.
However, many of the hopes, potentials and projects have not been fully realized in the subsequent
years. But after 2004, UPA came into power and the situation started worsening again. We missed a
historic  opportunity once more.
UPA's biggest blow to the n political system is that they have taken out Genuineness from
Governance; Authenticity from Administration. UPA has shown Governance of Enactment, not
Action.It has given an Administration of Entitlement without Delivery. We have become a polity of
Promises, and not Performance. We represent an economy of deficits, a work culture of delays
and an asset base of deficiency.Worse, Congress led UPA has made a global synonym of
Corruption, Scandal and Stagnation. To make it even worse, today, we are passing through total
Decision and Policy Paralysis. Sluggish economic growth, unprecedented price rise and unstable
Currency are its most visible facets.
The following demand urgent solutions; economy including agriculture, energy, environment including
natural  resources,  education  and  health,  employment,  external  and  internal  threats  to  security,
empowerment, Governance, and erosion of moral and societal values.
If has to survive as a nation, which it has to, in order to play its destined role in the comity of
nations, if it has to make its voice heard for creating a peaceful and egalitarian world order, then we
must take up the challenges with urgency and determination and provide proper solutions for them. It
is a pity that we have a demoralized leadership presiding over the state apparatus, which is incompetent
to handle the present problems. What is needed today is to arrive at a consensus about the 'Idea' of
and also to think and redesign our approach in consonance with the seekings and preferences of
the n people.
The situation in the country is deteriorating rapidly. Delay in resolving the crisis would be dangerous.
What is needed is to take lessons from history, recognise the vitality and resilience of , the power
of its world-view and utilize its strength, which drove it to glorious heights and analyse its weaknesses,
which led to this abysmal fall. Pick up the thread from the point where the continuum of our civilizational
3
consciousness was lost and reorient the polity in consonance with those strong points of n
psyche which will be the engine for our future glory. Let's keep the windows open, have a clear
understanding of the global scenario and how without destroying our uniqueness we can assimilate
the best of the technological advancements.
We can achieve this goal provided the leaders seriously set to this task. What we need is a political
party committed to deliver and a leadership with strong determination and political will. As Vivekananda
had said, "All power is within you. You can do anything. Believe in that." Yes, the power lies in the
people of , in the inner sanctum sanctorum of Mother . What is needed is to ignite the spark
and Mother would rise in her full glory.
As Sri Ma had once said that had become the symbolic representation of all the difficulties of
modern mankind but will also be the land of its resurrection to a higher and truer life. The will
leave no stone unturned to fulfill the dream of 1.22 billion ns.
Today, is blessed with the rare capacity and opportunity of Democracy, Demographyand
Demand. If we are able to consolidate and harness them, we will be able to reach the heights which
deserves. The biggest reason for a sorry state of affairs is bad intentions on the part of those who
have ruled the country for sixty years. And that is where we would show the first difference. For 
the goal of the policies and practices would be: Ek Bharat, Shreshtha Bharat!The path would be:
Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas.This is our commitment to the Nation and to the People.
With this determination of the party under the charismatic leadership of Shri Narendra Modi, we enter
the elections to the 16th Lok Sabha and would work whole-heartedly to give a stable, strong, visionary
and progressive Government to .
It is an opportunity to change our fate and of our nation.
Glory to Mother , glory to Her children.
Dr. (Prof.) Murli Manohar Joshi
Chairman
Manifesto Committee -2014
March 26, 2014
4
Attend the Imminent
Decade under the UPA - I and II can rightly be summed in one line, the 'Decade of Decay', in which
had a free fall on all fronts - be it governance, economy, diplomacy, foreign policy, border safety,
etc. At the same time, corruption, scams and crime against women have reached to unacceptable
levels. There has been gross misuse and total denigration of government and institutions. There has
also been erosion of authority of the office of the Prime Minister. The Government dithered by each
passing day, casting gloom and doom on the country that was once under the NDA regime called the
'Emerging Superpower'. In 2004, NDA left the Government with a near double digit growth. The Congressled UPA could not even maintain that growth and mismanaged the country so badly, that the growth
rate declined to 4.8%, resulting the country falling in a deep mess. We have lost a wonderful opportunity
and have pushed the country 20 years behind and rendered millions of men and women jobless.
Critical and urgent challenges facing the nation have been left unaddressed. Beyond impacting the
immediate short-term, this is corroding the long-term potential of the nation. People feel frustrated and
have lost hope in the system. Things must change, and they must change now. will take immediate
and decisive action to address these issues on a priority basis.
Price Rise
Runaway food inflation has crippled household budgets and contributed to the overall inflationary trend
under the Congress led UPA's watch. Even worse, the food and nutritional security of millions is
threatened. However, the Congress led UPA government has remained insensitive and fferent to the
plight of the people; tying itself into knots with short-term, mis-directed steps. The committee of Chief
Ministers, headed by Shri Narendra Modi, has already submitted a report on food inflation in 2011. The
report was unfortunately not acted upon by the Congress led UPA Government.
The led NDA Government's record of holding the prices is a demonstration of our commitment to
break the vicious cycle of high inflation and high interest rates. Our immediate task will be to rein in
inflation by several steps, such as:
put in place strict measures and special Courtsto stop hoarding and black marketing.
setting up a Price Stabilisation Fund.
unbundle FCIoperations into procurement, storage and distribution for greater efficiency.
leverage on technology to disseminate Real time data, especially to farmers - on production,
prices, imports, stocks and overall availability.
evolve a single' Agriculture Market'.
promote and support area specific crops and vegetables linked to food habits of the people.
Employment and Entrepreneurship
The country has been dragged through 10 years of Jobless Growthby the Congress led UPA
Government. Under the broader economic revival, will accord high priority to job creation and
opportunities for entrepreneurship. We will:
strategically develop high impact domains like Labour-intensive manufacturing(viz. textile,
footwear, electronics assembly, etc.) and Tourism.
strengthen the traditional employment bases ofagricultureand allied industries, and retailthrough modernization as well as stronger credit and market linkages.
5
harness the opportunities provided by the upgradation of infrastructureand housing, for its job
generating potential.
encourage and empower our youth forself-employment - incubating entrepreneurship as well as
facilitating credit.
address the employability issue by initiating a multi-skills development programme in mission
mode. Focus will be on job creation and entrepreneurship, in both rural and urban areas.
transform our Employment Exchangesinto Career Centres - connecting our youth with job
opportunities in a transparent and effective manner through the use of technology; as well as
providing counselling and training.
Corruption
Corruption is a manifestation of poor Governance. Moreover, it reflects the bad intentions of those
sitting in power. All pervasive corruption under the Congress led UPA has become a '
Crisis'.
We will establish a system, which eliminates the scope for corruption.We will do this through:
public awareness
technology enabled e-Governance -minimizing the discretion in the citizen-government interface.
system-based, policy-driven governance - making it transparent.
rationalization and simplification of the tax regime - which is currently repulsive for honest
tax payers.
simplification of the processes and procedures at all levels -bestowing faith in the citizens,
institutions and establishments.
Black Money
By minimizing the scope for corruption, we will ensure minimization of the generation of black money.
is committed to initiate the process of tracking down and bringing back black money stashed in
foreign banks and offshore accounts. We will set up a Task Force for this purpose and to recommend
amendments to existing laws or enact new laws. The process of bringing back black money to 
what belongs to , will be put in motion on priority. We will also proactively engage with foreign
Governments to facilitate information sharing on black money.
Decision and Policy Paralysis
The country has suffered a decade of maladministration and scams in addition to decision and policy
paralysis; thus bringing growth and development to a grng halt leading to a 'Governance deficit'.
This situation will be changed and the engine of Government will be ignited again with strong willpower
and commitment to public interest. We will also encourage the bureaucracy to take right decisions
and contribute their might in building a modern .
Poor Delivery
Wherever we go, we encounter bottlenecks. We experience it on a daily basis - in government offices
for even the simplest of public services, in our courts buried in high pendency and so on. Similarly, we
are known by a culture of missing links and lack of last mile connectivity. We have water but no
pipeline to carry it; we have schools but no teachers; we have computers and machines but no
electricity; we have scientists but no labs; we have instruments but no one to work on them. This
6
reduces the pace of our performance and results into wastage of time, money and energy. Intent to do
the right thing and the will to do things rightly, is missing. This has to be attended to on a priority basis.
Whatever we do and provide for, the whole chain has to be kept in mind. With this in mind,
we will:
remove bottlenecks and missing links in all sectors, activities and services.
focus on proper planning and execution for right outcomes.
strive for scale and speed with futuristic vision.
Build institutions for today and tomorrow.
Credibility Crisis
The biggest challenge that faces today is to restore the credibility of, and trust in the Union
Government. In recent years, the Union Government has lost every semblance of credibility. Its intentions,
integrity and initiatives, all are questionable. The Congress party has not only lowered the dignity of the
Government, but also the dignity of . This is what is driving recent adversities like the falling rupee
and countries riding roughshod over us. The will work for restoring the trust and credibility of the
Government. We will also ensure that the chain of responsibility and accountability is built in the
system.
7
Strengthen the Framework
Team 
Centre-State Relations
is a diverse country. Diverse communities settled in vastly different regions have their own aspirations.
Taking these aspirations into consideration, the centre and the states therefore have to evolve a working
system, which leads to harmonious relations. The genuine grievances of every state will be addressed
in a comprehensive manner.
We will place Centre-State relations on an even keel through the process of consultation and strive
for harmonious Centre-State relations.
Our Government will be an enabler and facilitator in the rapid progress of states. We will evolve a
model of  development, which is driven by the states.
Team shall not be limited to the Prime Minister led team sitting in Delhi, but will also include
Chief Ministers and other functionaries as equal partners.
Ensure fiscal autonomy of States while urging financial discipline.
Create 'Regional Councils of States', with common problems and concerns, with a view to seeking
solutions that are applicable across a group of states.
We will encourage cooperation among states on security-related issues, inter-state disputes and
for removing inter-regional economic disparities and promoting tourism.
We recognize the special needs and unique problems of the hill and desert states. In consultation
with the Governments of these states, state-specific developmental priorities/ models will be evolved
so that the aspirations of the people are met.
Given the unique status of Union Territories (UTs), they will receive special attention. We will focus
on developing and strengthening the economy of UTs. Tourism will be promoted, tribal welfare and
their rights will receive full attention, and infrastructure and coastal area development will be given
top priority.
We reiterate our commitment to the protection and integrated development of our island territories.
The moribund forums like ' Development Council' and 'Inter-State Council' will be revived
and made into active bodies.
Involve the state Governments in the promotion of foreign trade and commerce.
Help the states mobilize resources through investments in industry, agriculture and infrastructure.
Integrating the Nation - Its Vastness and Voices
In a democracy, everyone is not only free, but also encouraged to voice his or her concerns. It is also
necessary that these voices be heard and concerns redressed. However, all this should happen within
the framework of our constitution and with the spirit of 'First'. We have to keep the Nation at the
forefront of our thoughts and actions. Any activity, which disrupts the integrity of the nation, cannot be
in the interest of any segment of the society or any region of the country. All ns living in different
regions of the country have an equal stake in the progress of the country and they have to be assured
of the fruits of the progress.
Presently, we see that there is a vast regional disparity between different regions of the country
8
along developmental parameters, particularly between the western part and the eastern part.
Despite their richness in both natural as well as human resources, eastern part of still lags
behind.
We shall give the highest priority towards bringing the eastern parts of the country on par with the
western parts. To that extent, there shall be special focus and emphasis on the development of the
eastern side of .
Government will play the role of an enabler and a facilitator to the rapid progress of the states;
planning alongregional aspirations, strengths and potentials, evolving appropriate strategies
for various zones of the country - hilly regions, plains, desert and coastal areas.
Regional aspirations: has always stood for greater decentralization through smaller States.
Northeast : Resource rich North-Eastern states are lagging behind in development due to poor
governance, systemic corruption and poor delivery of public services. NDA government had initiated
concrete steps to address the issue of development of Northeast by setting up the Ministry of NorthEastern Region. We will empower this Ministry with a broader charter and non-lapsable funds for the
rapid development of the region.
will:
put special emphasis on enhancing the connectivity within the region and to the rest of the country.
There will be special emphasis on massive infrastructure development, especially along the Line
of Actual Control in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim.
address the issue of Flood control in Assam and river water management.
nurture more job generating opportunities like tourism and IT industry.
address the issue of infiltration and illegal immigrants in the Northeast region on a priority basis.
This will include clear policy directions and effective control at the ground level.
complete all pending fencing work along the -Bangladesh and -Myanmar border, stepping
up border security.
take measures for the safety of North-Eastern students studying across the country including
setting up Hostels for North-Eastern students at various educational centres.
deal with Insurgent groups with a firm hand.
Jammu and Kashmir: Jammu and Kashmir was, is and shall remain an integral part of the Union of
. The territorial integrity of is inviolable. will pursue an agenda of equal and rapid
development in all the three regions of the state - Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh.
The return of Kashmiri Pandits to the land of their ancestors with full dignity, security and assured
livelihood will figure high on the  agenda.
The long pending problems and demands of refugees from Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (POK) will
be addressed.
reiterates its stand on the Article 370, and will discuss this with all stakeholders and remains
committed to the abrogation of this article.
All steps will be taken to provide good governance, better infrastructure, educational opportunities,
healthcare and more job opportunities, leading to a better quality of life in the valley.
Seemandhra and Telangana: is committed to do full justice to Seemandhra, and address the
9
issues of development and governance of Seemandhra and Telangana.
Decentralization and People's Participation
From Representative to Participatory Democracy
is a country of immense diversity - a highly decentralized federal structure is thus crucial in
meeting the varied ideas and aspirations of our diverse people. Power is currently concentrated in
Delhi and the State capitals. We believe this power should be genuinely decentralized. has stood
for greater decentralization through devolving of powers to the states. A vast reservoir of People's
Powerhas not yet been tested in the real sense. We have not been able to involve the people in
Governance as functionaries and facilitators.
People's Participation:Our developmental process will be a people's movement - of Jan bhagidari.
We will make them the active drivers of development rather than mere passive recipients.
People's Engagement:Through Pro-active, Pro-people Good Governance,we will ensure the
Government itself directly reaches out to the people, especially the weak and marginalized sections
of society.
We will further evolve the Public Private Partnership (PPP) model into a People-Public-Private
Partnership (PPPP) model.
is committed to strengthen self-Governanceat the local level and we will empowerPanchayati
Raj Institutionswith extensive devolution of the 3 Fs - Functions, Functionaries and Funds.
Good performers amongst the Panchayats will be rewarded with additional developmental grants.
Strengthen the institution of the Gram Sabha, respecting their inputs and initiatives for development
process.
We will actively involve people in policy formulationand evaluationthrough various platforms.
We will encourage Opennessin the Government, involving all stakeholders in the decision-making
processes.
10
Reform the System
Good Governance: Transparent, Effective, Involving and Encouraging
First
believes in being one country, one people and one nation. recognizes the importance of
diversity in n society, and the strength and vibrancy it adds to the nation. The party believes in the
principle of unity in diversity.
constitutes of all its' people, irrespective of caste, creed, religion or sex. It constitutes of all the
communities - ethnic, social and cultural groups and also our culture, which is defined by tolerance
and co-existence. The hallmark of is "Unity in Diversity". It constitutes of each and every inch of
our land, its natural resources and mental and physical energy we possess. It constitutes of all the
institutions made in the past and present.
First simply means nurturing and protecting all the elements, which is made of. It does not
exclude anyone or anything - it only includes everything and everyone, which is made of. It is
complete ; without exclusion, without exception. It also means that whatever is in the interest of
will be in the interest of all the elements that is made up of, including its citizens.
The counter to the concept of 'First' is what is happening today; appeasement of one, at the cost
of the other, using Institutions for protecting the interest of a particular party or persons. It is reflected
in the thinking that whatever is not in the interest of a party is not in the interest of . Clearly,
Governance on these lines is not in the interest of .
Simply speaking, 'First' puts the  interest first while taking any decision or step both by
Governments and citizens. Even more simply put, you have to just see the face of and ns
when you are in doubt. This is what separates 'First' from the present day politics and Governance
of the Congress led UPA.
For 
the only philosophy and religion of a Government should be First.
the only epic of a Government should be 's Constitution.
the only power of a Government should be the power of the people.
the only prayer of a Government should be the welfare of its people.
the only way of a Government should be 'Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas'.
Open Government and Accountable Administration
Administrative reforms will be a priority for the  Hence, we propose to implement them through an
appropriate body under the PMO. The objective will be to bring in transparency in Government's decisionmaking process. Government systems and processes would be relooked to make them citizen friendly,
corruption free and accountable. Every effort will be made to meet the development aspirations of the
people and make the Government agencies accountable to the citizens. We will set-up an effective
Lokpal institution. Corruption at any level will be dealt with firmly and swiftly.
From birth certificate to school admission, from setting up business to paying of taxes, our present
systems complicate the lives of our own people. We will reform it and make it easy in terms of access,
efficiency and delivery. Following specific action will be initiated:
digitization of Government records will be taken up on top priority so that they are easily accessible.
11
performance review, social and environment audit would be mandated for all Government schemes
and programmes.
open up Government to draw expertise from the industry, academia and society into the services.
government will be redefined by elimination of whatever is obsolete in laws, regulations, administrative
structures, practices and would be purposive.
we will generate 'Kartavya Bhavna'among public servants as lives and productivity of people is
dependent on the quality and efficiency of public services.
On the whole, hallmarks of our Governance model would be:
People-centric
Policy driven
Time bound delivery
Minimum Government, Maximum Governance
E-Governance: Easy, Efficient and Effective
believes that IT is a great enabler for empowerment, equity and efficiency. The NDA Government
had made IT one of the major thrust areas. With the result, is the IT capital for the whole world.
But back home, the benefits of IT have not percolated down. This will be a high priority area for that
IT touches the lives of ordinary men and women. has been known for good Governance and eGovernance will become the backbone for good Governance. aims to nurture a Digital -making every household and every vidual digitally empowered.
Information Technology has made it possible to make information and services reach to the ordinary
men and women even in remote areas, easily and effectively. Availability of information is the key to
empowerment of the stakeholders. This also reduces the scope for discretion and manipulation.
We will:
focus on increasing the penetration and usage of broadband across the country. Deployment of
broadband in every village would be a thrust area.
leverage technology for e-Governance and engage proactively with the people through social media
for participative governance and effective public grievance redressal mechanism.
generate IT based jobs in rural and semi-urban areas.
make technology enabled products affordable for students.
use technology to reduce the burden of books on children. Make all institutions and schools eenabled in a phased manner. Digital learning and training to be used extensively.
pursue a mission mode project under the ' Rural Internet and Technology Mission' for use
of telemedicine and mobile healthcare for rural healthcare delivery; use of IT for agriculture for real
time information; Self Help Groups; retail trade and SMEs; and rural entrepreneurs, etc.
initiate a  e-Governance Plan to cover every Government office from the centre to the
panchayats. The 'E-Gram, Vishwa Gram' scheme in Gujarat to be implemented nationwide.
promote e-Bhasha -  Mission for the promotion of IT in n Languages.
focus to bring SC/ST, OBCs and other weaker sections of the society within the ambit of IT
enabled development.
12
deploy IT to protect 's priceless cultural and artistic heritage, which includes digitization of all
archives and museology.
promote 'open source' and 'open standard' software.
mandate digitization of all government work to reduce corruption and delays.
set up High-speed digital highways to unite the nation.
use technology to reduce Transmission and distribution losses.
use mobile and e-Banking to ensure financial inclusion.
aims to make every household digitally literate with a goal to make the Global Knowledge
hub, with IT being a major driver and engine of growth.
Institutional Reform - Administrative, Judicial, Police and Electoral
Administrative
Today, people of this country are frustrated with the present system. Our administrative set up should
be people-centric, responsive and result-oriented. With this in mind, we are committed to bring the
following reforms:
the administration and its members will be made truly accountableto their tasks as well as the
people through rigorous evaluation process.
good performance will be rewarded; non-performers will be given opportunities and training support
to improve.
rationalization and convergenceamong the Ministries, departments and other arms of the
Government will be ensured to focus on delivery.
open up government to draw expertise from the industry, academia and society.
services of youth in particular will be tapped to contribute in governance with Fellowshipand
Internship programmes launched at various levels.
Judicial
is committed to ensure Justice for All - justice which is prompt and accessible. Understanding
that Justice Delayed is Justice Denied, we will adopt a multi-pronged approach to address the high
pendency of cases in our judicial system.
We will:
accord high priority to judicial reforms to address the issue of appointment of judges, filling the
vacancies, opening new courts, setting up a mechanism for speedy clearance of the backlog of
cases at various levels in the judiciary.
initiate a mission mode project for filling the vacancies in the judiciary and for doubling the number
of courts and judges in the subordinate judiciary.
set up a  Judicial Commission for the appointment of judges in higher judiciary.
create a fund for modernization of courts to improve the operational efficiency of courts.
set up a separate class of courts for cases involving specified commercial laws which fast track
the litigation process.
reform the criminal justice system to make dispensation of justice simpler, quicker and more
effective and after examining the recommendations of the earlier reports on this subject.
13
iInitiate the computerization and networking of courts all over the country.
extend fast track courts to all layers of the judiciary.
expand alternative dispute redressal mechanisms through Lok Adalats and Tribunals.
implement the  Litigation Policy in letter and spirit to reduce average pendency time of
cases.
review and reduce significantly the number of cases, in which the Government is a litigant in the
next five years.
periodically review and refine/ scrap outdated laws.
create courts specially equipped to deal with IPR cases.
give special emphasis to the development of Alternate Dispute Resolution mechanisms - like
Lok Adalats, Arbitration and Conciliation centres.
set up a comprehensive  e-Library, empowering Lawyers.
aim to enhance the number of women in the Bar as well as Bench, reducing the gender gap in
judiciary.
evolve a  network of specialized universitieshaving expertise in complementary domains
- like Forensics, Arbitration, IPR, Inter Law, etc.
develop into a Global Hub for Arbitrationand Legal Process Outsourcing.
We will simultaneously reform the legal system to make it more accessible to the common man.
We will:
undertake a comprehensive review of the legal system to simplify complex legislations - converge
overlapping legislation, as well as remove contradictory and redundant laws.
establish an institutional mechanism to periodically review and give suggestions for refining our
laws.
simplifylegal procedure and language.
make legal information open and freely accessible.
run legal awarenessprogrammes and introduce in school curriculum - making the common man
aware of his rights and duties.
Police
Our police forces are entrusted with the crucial responsibility of maintaining law and public order,
which forms one of the central pillars of our democracy. We will work with the states to empower them
with the authority, independence and resources necessary to deliver:
Roll out a comprehensive strategy for bringing the n Police at par with inter standards.
Facilitate trainingand capacity building of Police forces.
Modernizethe police force, equipping them with the latest technology.
Initiate the networking of police stations across the country for intelligence sharing and crime
control.
Strengthen Investigations, making them Swift, Transparent, Fair, Clear and Decisive - acting as
an inescapable deterrent to wrong- doers and a protective shield to the innocent.
14
Developspecialized expertisein investigation; through continuous training, especially in evolving
competencies.
Overhaul our intelligence set up, with special focus on coordination and integration of human and
technological intel - comprehensively gearing it towards collecting real time, specific and actionable
inputs.
Modernize our Prison systemwith technology and infrastructure; to strengthen the security as
well human rights and correctional dimensions.
Work towards evolving common  standardsand protocols.
Train and technologically enable the police to track, pursue, as well as prevent Cyber Crime.
Bring Coastal States together on a common platform to discuss issues of Marine Policing.
Reinterpret the age-old concept of community policingin modern times; evolving ways for the
police to reach out to the people, building bonds of trust and friendship - including spreading out
into areas of public safetyand public wellness.
Give special emphasis for improving the working conditionsand welfare of police personnel.
Electoral
is committed to initiate electoral reforms to eliminate criminals. The will seek, through
consultation with other parties, to evolve a method of holding Assembly and Lok Sabha elections
simultaneously. Apart from reducing election expenses for both political parties and Government, this
will ensure certain stability for State Governments. We will also look at revising expenditure limits
realistically.
15
Widen the Platform
Certain segments of have been historically disadvantaged. Due to a lopsided development approach
and skewed allocation of resources, they continue to lag behind the rest of the country in socioeconomic cators in spite of having abundant natural resources and talent. Consequently, our
demographic dividend is not being fully actualized. It is the duty of the government to enable every
n to realize his or her full potential, ensuring equitable growth and development. We are committed
towards this end, and will ensure the same by:
Empowering each and every n through health and education.
Increasing Opportunities by making Job creation central to our economic model.
Ensuring a basic level of Infrastructure toall - Home, Electricity, Water, Toilets and Access.
Poor and Marginalized - Bridge the Gap
Our Government will be a government of the poor, marginalized and left behind.Every n
has a right over everything that has. From this, he or she is free to weave his or her own dreams.
The of tomorrow will have 125 crore such dreams, and will be built on the same. We will not only
empower our citizens with the ability to dream; we will enable them with the capability to actualize
their dreams.
The real test of the success of a development process lies in the happiness of the common man. The
fruits of growth and development must reach the weakest, most deprived and remotest of people. With
firm belief in the concept of Antyodaya - uplifting the poorest of the poor -Extreme Povertyand
malnutrition will be treated as a  priority, and will be addressed on Mission Mode.
We will:
strengthen Deliveryof poverty alleviation programs through convergence, transparency and
efficiency.
identify 100 most backward districtsof the country to bring them at par with other districts
through prioritized and integrated development.
strengthen the natural resource base of the people to tide over natural calamities.
aim to gainfully employ rural poor in agriculture and allied activities.
enable the urban poor to develop skills so that they take advantage of the emerging opportunities.
facilitate partnership across all levels of government, civil society, academic and financial institutions
in this  mission of poverty alleviation.
Food Security
has always held that 'universal food security' is integral to  security. will take steps to
ensure that the benefits of the scheme reach the common man and that the right to food does not
remain an act on paper or a political rhetoric. will review all the laws and schemes, in consultation
with the states, to ensure a corruption-free efficient implementation of food security, which would be a
priority.
will:\
review the successful PDS models, and incorporate the best practices to revise the existing PDS,
for benefitting the common man.
16
address the issue of under-nutrition and malnutrition.
encourage the production of cereals, pulses and oils.
radically transform the Food Corporation of (FCI).
ensure contingency stocks for any exigencies arising due to natural calamities or external factors.
seek the participation of voluntary organizations in running community kitchens.
SCs, STs, OBCs and Other Weaker Sections - Social Justice and Empowerment
The is committed to bridge the gap, following the principles of Samajik Nyay(social justice) and
Samajik Samrasata(social harmony). This social justice must be further complemented with economic
justice and political empowerment. Instead of pursuing identity politics and tokenisms, we will
focus on empowering the deprived sections of society. Steps will be taken to create an enabling
ecosystemof equal opportunity - for education, health and livelihood. We will accord highest priority
to ensuring their security, especially the prevention of atrocities against SCs & STs.
We believe that accelerated social justice and integrated development is the key to the progress of our
country and success of our democracy. The is committed to bridge the divide following the
principle of social justice (Samajik Nyay) and social harmony (Samajik Samrasata). Instead of pursuing
identity politics and tokenisms, which have not led to any tangible results for the SC, ST, OBCs and
other weaker sections of our society, the will focus on tangible development and empowerment.
A high priority for SC, ST, OBCs and other weaker sections would be to create an ecosystem for
education and entrepreneurship.
is committed to the eradication of untouchability at all levels.
is committed to eliminate manual scavenging.
will look at more effective ways to pull these people out of the poverty line.
will ensure that the funds allocated for schemes and programmes for SC, ST, OBCs and other
weaker sections are utilized properly.
A mission mode project would be made for housing, education, health and skills development.
Special focus would be on the children, especially the girl child, with regards to health, education
and skills development.
Tribal development will be one of the focus areas. believes that half-hearted, incremental and
piecemeal attempts for the development of tribals have not helped. So the commits to make a
comprehensive, all-encompassing long-term strategy to empower tribals and ensure their welfare. The
goal would be to ensure tribal development while preserving the unique identities of this community.
The Governments of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh have successfully implemented the
tribal welfare and development schemes and their model would be used for tribal welfare and development.
will initiate a 'Van Bandhu Kalyan Yojna' at the  level to be overseen by a 'Tribal Development
Authority'. This scheme will focus on:
Setting up the entire education network for tribals.
Upgrading housing, water and health facilities.
Electrification of tribal hamlets and provision of all - weather roads.
Initiating new economic activities.
17
Promoting the products associated with the tribal culture by setting tribal haats in tourist towns
and other centres.
Ensure that the tribal land is not alienated.
Facilitating access to minor forest produce and creating a network of rural haats (markets).
" Establishing the  Centre for Tribal Research and Culture to preserve the tribal culture and
languages.
" Enhancing the funds for tribal welfare and development.
Minorities - Equal Opportunity
believes that in 's 'Unity in Diversity' lies 's biggest strength. We cherish the depth and
vibrancy that the diversity in n society adds to the nation. is thus committed to the preservation
of the rich culture and heritage of 's minority communities; alongside their social and economic
empowerment.
It is unfortunate that even after several decades of independence, a large section of the minority, and
especially Muslim community continues to be stymied in poverty. Modern must be a nation of
equal opportunity. is committed to ensure that all communities are equal partners in 's
progress, as we believe cannot progress if any segment of ns is left behind.
We will:
Ensure that the young, and the girl child in particular get education and jobs without discrimination.
Strengthen and modernize minority educational systems and institutions; dovetailing them with
modern requirements.  Madrasa modernizationprogramme would be initiated.
Empower with vibrancy in Livelihood and Entrepreneurial opportunities.
Augment their traditional artisanship and entrepreneurial skill, which are a backbone of our cottage
and small-scale industry - strengthening these sectors through better market linkages, branding
and access to credit.
Empower Waqf Boardsin consultation with religious leaders; taking steps to remove encroachments
from and unauthorized occupation of Waqf properties.
Curate their rich heritageand culture - maintenance and restoration of heritage sites; digitization
of archives; preservation and promotion of Urdu.
Ensure apeacefuland secureenvironment, where there is no place for either the perpetrators or
exploiters of fear.
Facilitate the setting up of a permanent Inter-faith Consultative mechanism to promote harmony
and trust, under the auspices of religious leaders.
Neo-Middle Class - Meet their Aspirations
has a large middle class with immense understanding, talent and purchasing power. In addition,
a whole new class has emerged. Those who have risen from the category of poor and are yet to
stabilize in the middle class, the 'neo middle class'. This class needs proactive handholding. Having
moved out of poverty, their aspirations have increased. They want amenities and services of a certain
standard. They thus now feel that Government facilities and services are not up to the mark, and hence
resort to the private sector for things like education, health and transport. This is obviously costly,
putting the neo middle class into a daily dilemma. As more and more people move into this category,
18
their expectations for better public services have to be met. We have to strengthen the Public Sector
for providing efficient services to our citizens. In particular attention will be paid on government providing:
Educational scholarships and educational facilities.
Medical insurance and quality healthcare services.
Middle-income housing.
Efficient public transport systems.
Rural Areas - High Priority
Two-thirds of our people live in villages. Lack of amenities to live and opportunities to work, however, are
restricting our rural life. Both these factors are the result of prolonged neglect. A full-fledged programme
for 'Rural Rejuvenation' will be made and implemented which will comprise of integrated strategies for
personal, economic and social well being of the villagers. Through the idea of Rurban, we will bring
urban amenities to our rural areas, while retaining the soul of the village.
Agriculture, rural development and poverty alleviation go hand in hand. Major thrust area for rural
development would be to improve village level infrastructure in terms of roads, potable water, education,
health, supply chain, electricity, broadband, job creation, security in rural areas and linkage to markets.
Urban Areas - High Growth Centres
More than one-third of our population is already living in our cities and towns. Soon, the urban areas
will cover half our people. Moreover, our cities should no longer remain a reflection of poverty and
bottlenecks. Rather they should become symbols of efficiency, speed and scale.
We will look at urbanisation as an Opportunity rather than a Threat.
Major stepswill be undertaken in Transportand Housing for 'Urban Upliftment' in .
We will initiate building 100 new cities; enabled with the latest in technology and infrastructure -adhering to concepts like sustainability, walk to work etc, and focused on specialized domains.
The approach to urban development will be based on integrated habitat development - building on
concepts like Twin citiesand Satellite towns.
Upgrade existing urban centres, transitioning focus from basic infrastructure to public utility services
like Waste and Water Management - for a clean and healthy city life.
Cleanliness and Sanitationwill be given priority - efficient Waste and Water management systems
will be set up. Model townswill be identified for rolling out integrated waste management
infrastructure.
Wi-Fi facilities will be made available in public places and commercial centres.
Urban poverty alleviation scheme would be a key thrust area.
Use technology for scientific, strategic and long term town planning - including GIS based mapping.
Build quality integrated Public Transport systems, discouraging usage of private vehicles.
19
Leap Forward
We have to give the taste of a developed country to this very generation. We have to take a quantitative
andqualitative leap. The time of knee jerk reactions and incremental changes has gone. What we
need is a quantum jump and a total change. We also believe that development has to be holistic,
uniform and all pervasive. Further, we have to make the people active partners in whatever is happening
and empower them to take advantage of the development process. We will make an effort that government
withdraws from those services which could be done by others and devote that extra time, money and
energy for social sectors, particularly for development of the weaker sections. And a common thread
will run across all our ideas and initiatives. This common thread is the wire and wave of Technology -maximum application of technology for making governance easy, economical and effective.
Social Security - A Caring Government, Passionate Society
has always been a caring society. It is in our culture to help the aged, the weak and the helpless.
We have to retain this. We have to educate our younger generations about this. The social security
schemes of the Governments have to be made more meaningful. Our aspirations get frustrated when
we encounter a weak social infrastructure. We need it on a daily basis.
Children - the Future of the Nation
"There can be no keener revelation of a society's soul than the way in which it treats its children" -Nelson Mandela
cators related to children welfare are an cator of the progress of the nation, be it health, education
or safety of children. Under the UPA rule, the same has not been given its due weightage. is
committed to address the issues related to children, like malnutrition and under-nutrition, problem of
child labour, child-trafficking and missing children, sexual abuse, school dropouts and the increasing
crime rate among juveniles. will take the following steps to ensure survival, development, participation
and protection of children:
Lay special emphasis on vulnerable children and especially those belonging to the vulnerable
communities  like  SCs,  STs,  OBCs,  migrants,  slum  dwellers,  street  dwellers  and  those  with
disabilities.
Ensure effective implementation of the Right to Education, Right to Food Security Act.
Review, amend and strengthen the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act,
2012 and Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS).
Focused efforts will be made to address issue of anaemia.
Reduce the burden of books on children without compromising on the quality of education.
Endeavour to inculcate values amongst children.
Senior Citizens
is committed to the welfare of senior citizens, especially their security and health care. We will
take measures to deal with the issues related to the senior citizens in a focused manner.
will:
Provide financial support, exploring ideas like additional tax benefits and higher interest rates.
Invest in setting up and improving old-age homes.
Harness their experience in the  Interest. Devise schemes and programs to engage the
20
senior citizens as volunteers / part time workers in various development programmes of the
government, in urban and rural areas. This will not only help in utilizing their time, but also it would
be an effective utilization of their experience and may add an additional source of income for them.
Specially Abled
About 70 million people are suffering from disability, and considers it a serious neglect. The
welfare and rehabilitation of disabled people is integral to our vision of a caring society and that of a
responsive government. The commits to:
Enact the 'Rights of the Persons with Disabilities bill' (RPWD).
Use technology to deliver low cost quality education to specially-abled students 'in-home' - through
E-learning.
Identify each and every special needs person across the country - establishing a web based
disability registration system to issue universal IDfor all applicable government benefits (healthcare,
transportation, jobs, education etc).
Ensure disabled friendly access to public facilities, public buildings and transport.
Ensure maximum economic independence of the disabled by creating more income generation
models for them.
Support and aid voluntary organizations working for the care of the disabled.
Provide a higher tax relief for the family member taking care of the disabled.
Youth - Making Unstoppable
'Young men, my hope is in you. Will you respond to the call of your nation? Each one of you has a
glorious future if you dare believe me. Have a tremendous faith in yourselves, like the faith I had when
I was a child, and which I am working out now. Have that faith, each one of you, in yourself-that eternal
power is lodged in every soul-and you will revive the whole of the country.' - Swami Vivekananda
considers youth as the most productive asset of the nation who have played a key role in taking
the country to a near double digit growth. All sectors dominated by youth are doing exceptionally well.
is the oldest civilization but the youngest country and this necessitates that the policies must be
based on the judicious mix of experience of energy, and be 'Youth inclusive', so that youth are an
integral part of the development process. We commit to review and revise policies to seek participation
of youth in decision-making and nation building process and actively get the youth to participate in
decision-making bodies.
we will initiate the 'Young Leaders programme' in all sectors, to recognize, reward and involve
these exceptionally talented youth to serve as role models and mentors for others.
set up the  Youth Advisory Council.
will initiate nation-wide 'district level incubation and accelerator programme' for encouraging
innovation and entrepreneurship.
procedure to avail Student's loans will be simplified and loans made affordable.
set up neighbourhood Children's/ Youth Parliament across that leads to vibrant student
committees.
Will launch a programme, 'Youth for Development'.
21
Promotion of Sports
recognizes the importance of sports in society and for all age groups. Sports have a direct relation
to fitness, good health and productivity. has not fared well in sports, and needs to invest for
promotion of sports in an organized manner.
will promote all sports - traditional and modern.
More funds will be allocated to sports, and we will encourage the State Governments to fully
discharge their responsibility in the promotion of sports.
Steps would be taken to inculcate a culture of sports at the school level by arranging sports
facilities and training needs for promoting a healthy lifestyle, and making sports as a compulsory
part of the school curriculum.
Launch a ' Sports Talent Search System', so that extraordinary sporting talent is identified
at a very young age. Such promising boys and girls will be selected for special training. The
existing rural sports programme and  Women Sports Festival will be broadened to reach
every village and to identify talent for nurturing and excellence development.
Attractive career path needs to be planned for sportspersons providing security of career through
jobs in government, PSUs and private sector.
Establish sports academies across the country.
Special scheme would be devised for sportspersons to ensure social security.
Encourage business houses to patronize sports and sportspersons.
Mandate all new housing colonies to include sports facilities.
Women - The Nation Builder
recognizes the important role of women in development of the society and growth of the nation,
and remains committed to give a high priority to Women's Empowerment and welfare. ruled
states have demonstrated this through various schemes. also recognizes the need for women's
security as a precondition to women's empowerment and will undertake the following for women welfare:
Women's welfare and development will be accorded a high priority at all levels within the government,
and is committed to 33% reservation in parliamentary and state assemblies through a
constitutional amendment.
Launch a  campaign for saving the girl child and educating her - Beti Bachao - Beti
Padhao.
Structure a comprehensive scheme, incorporating best practices from past successes like Balika
Samruddhi, Ladli Laxmi and Chiranjeevi Yojana to support encourage positive attitude amongst
families towards the girl child.
Program for women healthcarein a mission mode, especially focusing on domains of Nutrition
and Pregnancy - with emphasis on rural, SCs, STs and OBCs.
We will enable women with training and skills- setting up dedicated Women ITIs, Women wings
in other ITIs.
Strict implementation of laws related to women, particularly those related to rape.
Fund for relief and rehabilitation of rape victims lies unused at the Centre as the Government has
not worked out the modalities of dispensation. will clear this on priority.
22
Government will create an Acid Attack victims welfare fund to take care of the medical costs
related to treatment and cosmetic reconstructive surgeries of such victims.
Make police stations women friendly, and increase the number of women in police at different
levels.
Introduce self defence as a part of the school curriculum.
Using information technology for women's safety.
Set up an All Women Mobile Bank to cater to women.
Special skills training and business incubator park for women.
Setting up special business facilitation center for women.
Expand and improve upon the network of women / working women hostels.
Set up a dedicated W-SME (Women Small and medium enterprises) cluster in every district.
Review the working conditions and enhance the remuneration of Anganwadi worker's.
Remove any remaining gender disparities in property rights, marital rights and cohabitation rights.
Special adult literacy initiative would be started for women with focus on SCs, STs, OBCs, and
slum residents.
Will ensure that the loans to Women Self Help Groups would be available at low interest rates.
Special programs aimed at girls below poverty line, tribals and gent women.
Appropriate measures would be taken to check female foeticide, dowry, child marriage, trafficking,
sexual harassment, rape and family violence.
We will transform the quality of lifeof women in Ruralby providing electricity, tapped water,
cleaner fuel and toilets in every home.
Education - Enroll and Excel
believes that education is the most powerful tool for the advancement of the nation and the most
potent weapon to fight poverty. Education in needs to be revitalized and reorganized to make
future generations proud of their culture, heritage and history and also for creating confidence in the
vitality of . Every effort shall be made to ensure 'equality of opportunity in access and success' to
all learners; creating a harmonious, and cohesive egalitarian society that practices democratic values.
This would be possible only when Education accords due emphasis on  integration, social
cohesion, religious amity,  identity and patriotism. It must also be analyzed how far education
has contributed to moral, ethical and humanistic values in the viduals and the society.
Education must create minds free from superstitions, hatred and violence and become an important
vehicle to cement  unity, social cohesion and religious amity. Our endeavour should be to
inculcate moral, ethical and humanistic values in the viduals and the society.
has to become a knowledge society and has to reverberate with educated skilled manpower of
high standards required to meet the challenges of 21st century. This requires a bold and visionary
leadership to introduce appropriate policy and structural changes.
Highest priority would be given to address the acute shortage of teachers and researchers, quality of
education and research, and also the employability factor associated with most of the courses. Education
should not only lead to employability but also job creation and entrepreneurship by introducing a
 multi-skills orientation program.
23
We intend to review and revise education system; the salary structures associated with the teaching
staff and most importantly, address the shortfall of faculty and related issues in the country. The
system shall be made people-friendly and the credibility of the system shall be restored.
Investment in education yields the best dividend. Public spending on education would be raised to 6%
of the GDP, and involving the private sector would further enhance this.
Under the scheme of 'Quality education for all', would take the following steps;
School Education
NDA's flagship program 'Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan': Mechanism would be set up for its performance
audit and to have real time information about its performance. Programme shall be strengthened
and expanded with a goal to remove illiteracy.
Universalization of secondary school education and skills development through functional school
shall be seriously pursued with particular focus on rural, tribal and difficult areas.
The content and process of school education shall be thoroughly reviewed to make it dynamic,
stress-free, attractive and responsive to the emerging  needs.
Girls shall be provided all possible help to continue and complete school education.
The digital divide shall not be allowed to create further divisions in the learning situations of children.
Special pedagogy would be developed for differently-abled students.
On priority, a  modernization programme for madrasa's would be started.
Mid-day meal scheme would be revitalized in terms of management and delivery.
We will explore ways to reduce the daily burden of carrying books to school for children, which
would also entail use of technology for education as a mission mode project.
Establish a  E-Libraryto empower school teachers and students.
Initiate a multi-country student exchange programme for broadening the horizon of school going
children.
Creative talents of students will be recognized and encouraged.
Higher and Professional Education
The basic objective of higher and professional education is not only rapid advancement of the affluent
sector of the society but also to improve the lot of the last man in the line.
The content should be designed to prepare the students to understand the current challenges and
equip themselves to be able to readily adjust in a fast changing global scenario. Policy interventions
would include:
enhancing the pivotal role of the teachers by reworking the work culture of teacher training institutions
with a goal to prepare committed and performing teachers.
optimum utilization of physical and manpower resources.
a mechanism for close interaction between industry (including SME), academia and community
would be instituted.
needs assessment exercise will be done for identifying the future needs across sectors, and the
same would be used for developing appropriate courses for higher education, to ensure that the
country has adequate manpower for every sector, both established and emerging, in the economy.
24
will provide autonomy with steps to ensure accountability for institutions of higher learning.
will raise the standard of education and research, so that n universities become at par with
the top global universities and find their place in the global league.
the credibility of the regulatory bodies shall be restored. The procedures to make appointments to
senior positions shall be made transparent and merit and ability shall be the sole criterion.
UGC will be restructured and it will be transformed into a Higher Education Commission rather
than just being a grant distribution agency.
we will revisit the Apprenticeship Act to facilitate our youth to Earn while they Learn.
Vocational Training
Would set up Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC) and virtual classrooms to make it convenient
for working class people and housewives to further their knowledge and qualifications.
Correspondence courses will be started in new domains for self-employment, family run businesses,
entrepreneurship and innovation, and these courses would be provided for free to women. The goal
would be to prepare the youth for jobs being created by the emerging sectors, foster a spirit of
innovation and entrepreneurship, leading to more incomes and job creation.
will set up a  Commission on Education to report in two years on the state of education
and the reforms needed. Based on the report, will implement a  Education Policy to meet
the changing dynamics of the population's requirement with regards to quality education, innovation
and research, aiming to make a knowledge superpower by equipping its students with the necessary
skills and knowledge and to eliminate the shortage of manpower in science, technology, academics
and industry.
Skills - Focusing on Productivity and Employability
Skillful hands, bright minds, discipline and perseverance makes n talent an asset worldwide. We
have to live up to this potential, preparing the World's Largest Workforce. We have to make our
youth productively employed and gainfully engaged. We also have to develop as a Knowledge
Powerhouse. We have to train and nurture our human resource. We have to use it for leap-frogging
our Nation into the future. Unfortunately, the initiatives taken by Congress for this have fallen woefully
short, being almost non-starters.
We will take up skill development on a mission mode,at an unprecedented scale.
Skill Mapping - to help scientifically plan our  human resource development that 
would need (like engineers, architects, doctors, nurses, lawyers, accountants, plumbers, carpenters,
welders, etc.).
Launch a ' Multi-skill Mission'
We will run short-term courses, in the evenings, focusing on employable skills.
We will also set up Centres of Excellence in various sectors in partnership with the Industry.
To ensureindustry responsive manpower, we will bring together industry, universities and
government.
We will promotevocational training on a massive scale. Rigid segregation of formal education
and skill development will be broken; a mechanism will be established to give vocational qualifications
of Academic Equivalence.
25
We will also create institutional mechanisms to refresh and upgrade abilities through continuing
education - to make them employable.
We will focus on need based skill development and employability; making our youth employable
even in the most sophisticated jobs.
We will:
put emphasis on imparting soft skillsto enhance employability including a  program on
foreign languages.
launch a  programme for digital empowerment through computer literacy of the people,
especially the youth.
we will assess the talent and capacity of our youth from an early age; so they can be groomed
accordingly.
we will push for greaterpractical and research trainingencouraging real world experience
through internships and apprenticeships.
Health Services - Increase the Access, Improve the Quality, Lower the Cost
needs a holistic care system that is universally accessible, affordable and effective and drastically
reduces the out of pocket spending on health. NRHM has failed to meet the objectives and will be
radically reformed. accords high priority to health sector, which is crucial for securing the economy.
The overarching goal of healthcare would be to provide, 'Health Assurance to all ns and to reduce
the out of pocket spending on health care', with the help of state governments.
The current situation calls for radical reforms in the healthcare system with regards to  healthcare
programs and delivery, medical education and training and financing of healthcare. Our government
would focus on the following reforms in healthcare:
the last healthcare policy dates back to 2002. now needs a comprehensive healthcare policy
to address the complex healthcare challenges, keeping in view the developments in the healthcare
sector and the changing demographics. will initiate the New Health Policy.
initiate the ' Health Assurance Mission', with a clear mandate to provide universal healthcare
that is not only accessible and affordable, but also effective, and reduces the OOP spending for
the common man.
Education and Training - Will review the role of various professional regulatory bodies in healthcare
and consider setting up an overarching lean body for healthcare. High priority will be given to
address the shortfall of healthcare professionals.
Modernize Government hospitals, upgrading infrastructure and latest technologies.
Reorganize Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in order to converge various departments dealing
in healthcare, food and nutrition and pharmaceuticals, for effective delivery of healthcare services.
Increase the number of medical and para-medical colleges to make self sufficient in human
resources, and set up an AIIMS like institute in every state.
Yoga and Ayurveda are the gifts of ancient n civilization to humanity and we will increase the
public investment to promote Yoga and AYUSH. We will start integrated courses for n System
of Medicine (ISM) and modern science and Ayurgenomics. We will set up institutions and launch
a vigorous program to standardize and validate the Ayurvedic medicine.
26
Move to pre-emptive care model where the focus and thrust will be on child health and prevention.
School health program would be a major focus area, and health and hygiene will be made a part of
the school curriculum.
Focus on Rural Health care delivery.
Senior Citizens healthcare would be a special focus area.
Give high priority to chronic diseases, and will invest in research and development of solutions for
chronic diseases like obesity, diabetes, cancer, CVD etc.
Occupational health programs will be pursued aggressively.
Utilize the ubiquitous platform of mobile phones for healthcare delivery and set up the '
eHealth Authority' to leverage telemedicine and mobile healthcare for expanding reach and coverage
and to define the standards and legal framework for technology driven care.
Universalization of emergency medical services-108.
Re-orientation of herbal plants board to encourage farming of herbal plants.
Population stabilization would be a major thrust area and would be pursued as a mission mode
program.
Programme for Women Healthcare with emphasis on rural, SC, ST and OBC in a mission mode.
Mission mode project to eradicate malnutrition.
Launch  Mosquito Control mission.
Poor Hygiene and Sanitationhave a far reaching, cascading impact. We will ensure a 'Swachh
Bharat' by Gandhiji's 150th birth anniversary in 2019, taking it up in mission mode by converging
resources and building around jan bhagidari:
Create an open defecation free by awareness campaign and enabling people to build
toilets in their home as well as in schools and public places.
Set up modern, scientific sewageand waste management systems.
We will introduce Sanitation Ratingsmeasuring and ranking our cities and towns on 'sanitation';
and rewarding the best performers.
Make potable drinking wateravailable to all thus reducing water-borne diseases, which will
automatically translate into Diarrhoea-free .
Economic Revival
When the NDA Government completed its tenure the baton was handed over to the incoming UPA
Government with GDP growth nearing double digit in 2004. Inflation was under control. Fiscal Deficit
and Current Account Deficit were kept within limit and the overall Economy was showing robust
fundamentals. In contrast, now at the end of Congress led UPA regime, the GDP growth has plummeted
to very low of 4.8%, the inflation and price rise beyond control, the fiscal deficit and current account
deficit in the alarm zone, and the manufacturing sector facing a recession. The Congress led UPA has
indulged in massive scams during its last five years. In recent years, the n Rupee has seen a free
fall like never before.
This is basically the result of policy and decision paralysisof the UPA Government. Decisions are
simply not taken. And if they are taken, they turn into scandals. All this has destroyed the reputation
of our economy. To reverse this process, the first thing, which is required, is to restore confidencein
27
the integrity of the decision-making and sanctity of our decisions.
We will bring back credibility and trust in government, re-sowing confidence in the story domestically
as well as interly. Through consistent, long-term policies, we will not just spur the process of
economic growth,but also ensure that it is stableas well as balanced.
We will:
find out solutions, which are effective in the short run and lasting in the long run.
strictly implement Fiscal discipline, without compromising on funds availability for development
work and asset creation
allocate resources efficiently and effectively to re-energize the engines of growth.
re-visit the policy frameworkfor investments both foreign and domestic to make them more
conducive.
undertake Banking reformsto enhance ease and access, as well as accountability.
we will encourage Savings as an important driver of investment and growth.
NPAs
NPAs have increased sharply over the past few years and the trend continues. will take necessary
steps to reduce NPAs in Banking sector. Also, will set up a strong regulatory framework for
the non-banking financial companies to protect the investors.
Taxation
UPA Government has unleashed 'Tax terrorism' and 'uncertainty', which not only creates anxiety amongst
the business class and negatively impacts the investment climate, but also dents the image of the
country. realizes the importance of having a Tax Policy Roadmap, so that people are aware of the
future and plan accordingly. We will:
provide a non adversarial and conducive tax environment
rationalize and simplify the tax regime
overhaul the dispute resolution mechanisms
bring on board all State governments in adopting GST, addressing all their concerns
provide tax incentives for investments in research and development, geared towards genization
of technology and innovation
Foreign Direct Investment
Barring the multi-brand retail sector, FDI will be allowed in sectors wherever needed for job and asset
creation, infrastructure and acquisition of niche technology and specialized expertise. is committed
to protecting the interest of small and medium retailers, SMEs and those employed by them. The
FIPBs (Foreign Investment Promotion Board) functioning shall be made more efficient and investorfriendly
Agriculture - Productive, Scientific and Rewarding
Agriculture is the engine of 's economic growth and the largest employer, and commits
highest priority to agricultural growth, increase in farmer's income and rural development.
will:
increase public investment in agriculture and rural development.
28
take steps to enhance the profitability in agriculture, by ensuring a minimum of 50% profits over
the cost of production, cheaper agriculture inputs and credit; introducing latest technologies for
farming and high yielding seeds and linking MGNREGA to agriculture.
Put in place welfare measures for farmers above 60 years in age, small and marginal farmers and
farm labours.
Introduce and promote low water consuming irrigation techniques and optimum utilization of water
resources.
Introduce soil assessment based crop planning and setting up mobile soil testing labs.
Re-orient pest management and control programmes.
implement and incentivize the setting up of the food processing industry that has remained just a
plain talk till now. This will lead to better income for farmers and create jobs. We aim to set up 'agro
food processing clusters', with high value, export-quality and vacuum packed food processing
facilities, etc.
Focus on the quality, productivity and trade of spices.
Set up the 'Organic Farming and Fertilizer Corporation of ', to promote organic farming and
fertilizers, and provide incentives and support for marketing organic produce.
Introduce rotation farming for herbal products, based on geographical mapping, to enhance the
income of farmers.
Implement a farm insurance scheme to take care of crop loss due to unforeseen natural calamities.
Strengthen and expand rural credit facilities.
Promote horticulture, floriculture, pisciculture, bee-keeping and poultry for generating jobs and
income for rural 
Promote fish farming and aqua culture. Measures would be taken for the welfare of fisherman
Create Cluster based storage systems (e.g. Rice cluster, Wheat Cluster, Veg - Fruit cluster,
Spices cluster).
Introduce the concept of consumer friendly farmers' market to reduce wastages and increase
incomes and risk coverage.
Reform the APMC act.
Work with the states to set up seed culture labs in each district and regional agriculture innovation
labs to conserve agro-biodiversity and to identify and preserve rare genous varieties.
Explore setting up of regional Kisan TV channels.
Give high priority to poverty alleviation in rural areas.
Genetically Modified (GM) foods will not be allowed without full scientific evaluation on its long-term
effects on soil, production and biological impact on consumers.
Land acquisition is a contentious issue due to the opacity of the land acquisition process. will
adopt a ' Land Use Policy', which will look at the scientific acquisition of non-cultivable land,
and its development; protect the interest of farmers and keep in mind the food production goals and
economic goals of the country. It's implementation would be monitored by the  Land Use
Authority, which will work with the State Land Use Authorities to regulate and facilitate land management.
The power and functions of the  Land Use Authority would be similar to those of other regulatory
29
bodies.
Industry - Modern, Competitive and Caring
We should no longer remain a market for the global industry. Rather, we should become a Global
Manufacturing Hub. We have to encourage our industry to innovate and collaborate interly. We
have to encourage industry to produce efficiently and cost-effectively.
Economic freedom implies that Government will not get in the way of the freedom of viduals to start
and operate legitimate businesses. Increased economic freedom will break open the economic space
to new entrants, especially in the form of small and medium-enterprises, creating jobs and prosperity.
Particularly:
We will ensure that a conducive, enabling environmentis created making 'doing business' in
easy.
We will focus on cutting the red tape, simplifyingthe procedures and removing the bottlenecks.
We will ensure logistics infrastructure, including stable power.
Our attempt will be to move towards a single-window systemof clearances both at the centre
and also at the State level through a Hub-spoke model.
We will put in place a mechanism that will ensure that the Central and state governments work in
close coordination and synergy while giving clearances to mega projects.
Decision-making on environment clearanceswill be made transparent as well as time-bound.
We will set up World class InvestmentandIndustrial regionsasGlobal Hubs of Manufacturing.
We will set up a task force to review and revive our MSMEsector (Micro and Small Medium scale
Enterprises); enabling it with better access to formal credit and technology for modernization.
Frame the environment laws in a manner that provides no scope for confusion and will lead to
speedy clearance of proposals without delay.
Manufacturing
A strong manufacturing sector will not only bridge the demand-supply gap leading to price stabilization,
but also create millions of jobs and increase incomes for the working class. Above all, it will
increase the revenue for government and lead to import substitution to bring down the import bill.
We will make a hub for cost-competitive labour-intensive mass manufacturing. To give boost
to manufacturing, will:
Accord high priority to the growth of manufacturing, so that we can create enough jobs in the
country. This sector must grow fast to ensure employment and asset creation.
Take steps for Interest rate rationalization and have a clear tax policy to remove uncertainty and
create investor confidence.
Take all steps; like removing red-tapism involved in approvals, to make it easy to do business,
invest in logistics infrastructure, ensure power supply and undertake labour reforms, besides other
steps to create a conducive environment for investors.
Increase the public spending on R&D and Incentivize R&D investments by the industry to increase
the competitiveness of the manufacturing sector.
We will facilitate setting up of software and hardware manufacturing units.
30
Encourage n companies to go global and we will support n companies in this endeavor.
We believe that n entrepreneurs have the capability to take on global markets.
Set up trade facilitation to ensure easier customs clearances and visas for business travel.
Initiate a Government - Industry Dialogue, a channel for regular interface with the industry.
MSMEs (Micro, small and medium enterprises)
considers that the role of SME sector is crucial for the economic development of our country. The
sector needs to be developed by providing inter linkages for exports, availability of credit through
a dedicated SME bank, supply chain efficiencies, adoption of IT, support in R&D and innovation, and a
policy support for enhancing the mandate to purchase from SME for large scale projects. Overall goal
is to enhance the competitiveness of the SME sector leading to a larger contribution to our economic
growth and employment generation.
Cooperative Sector
Every effort will be made to encourage the cooperative sector. commits to review the existing laws
with regards to the cooperative sector, and will amend the multi-state cooperative act to remove
lacunae and anomalies.
Handicrafts
We will move up the value chain of the sector driven by a focus on Quality.
Market linkages - both  and inter
Access to credit and information and skills upgradation
Value addition will be encouraged through avenues like - branding, packaging and technology.
Artisans
Schemes will be drawn for skills upgradation and enhancement of business opportunities for artisans
like smiths, weavers, carpenters, hair-dressers, shoe-smiths, and potters.
Services - Driven by Quality and Efficiency
Business and Trade
The modern era is an era of exchange. Over-regulation needs to be addressed to stop the harassment
of the businessmen and traders. At the same time, we have to set up transparent systems, which
ensure credibility of our goods and services. At the same time, the bottlenecks in transporting and
exporting them have to be removed. Also, the flow of information about our tradable items has to be
made available to the rest of the world.
Focus onZero defect products.
Build world class Ports; connecting them with roads and rail to the hinterland so as to drive the
maritime trade of the country.
Air Cargo facilities will be enhanced throughout the country.
An Export Promotion Missionwill be established integrating all stakeholders.
Current accounts deficit will be brought down aggressively by focusing on exports and reducing
the dependency on imports. Value addition on our products will be the biggest task.
We shall work with the State governments to usher in the GSTin an appropriate timeframe. For
implementing the same, a robust IT network system will be put in place.
We will embark on the path of IPRsand Patents in a big way.
31
Take all necessary steps to protect the interest of retailers, small traders and small vendors and
equip them with the latest techniques and methods to modernize them and make them competitive.
Commit to ensure that the retailers and SMEs don't have to spend time and money for seeking
multiple licenses to start the business. There will a system in place to avoid harassment of small
traders.
Ensure easy availability of institutional credit.
Review obsolete and multiple laws to reduce and simplify them.
Remove ambiguity in rules to make way for prompt decisions without any scope for discretion.
Telecom revolution has touched length and breadth of the country but there is significant scope
and necessity to improve the quality of voice and data to fully leverage the potential.
Tourism - Untapped Potential
recognizes the role tourism and hospitality can play as a foreign exchange earner and its ability
to create millions of jobs every year. Tourism plays a key role in socio-economic progress through
creation of jobs, enterprise, infrastructure development, and foreign exchange earnings.
realizes that the tourism sector needs a clear plan for growth, and commits to initiate a
mission mode project to create 50 tourist circuits that are affordable and built around themes like: a.)
Archaeological and Heritage, b.) Cultural and Spiritual, c.) Himalayan, d.) Desert, e.) Coastal, f.)
Medical (Ayurveda and Modern Medicine), etc. This will lead to creation of infrastructure and employment
around each tourist circuit and help in boosting revenue generation.
Specialized course in tourism will be started for capacity development. Safety and Security of tourists
would be accorded due priority.
Labour Force - The Pillar of Our Growth
recognizes the fact that the labour is the key to the revival of the economy and so are the laws
governing them. We believe in promoting a harmonious relationship between labour and the industry,
with both playing an important contributory role in economic growth and development.
We will ensure that the interests of labour in the unorganized sector are protected.
For the organized labour, we propose to encourage industry owners and labour to embrace the concept
of 'Industry Family'. This concept, in which industry owners and labours bond as a family, is guided by
the principles of efficiency, skill development and upgradation, productivity, appropriate wages and
perquisites, and security towards this end. We will:
issue identity cards to the unorganized sector labourers, and arrangements will be made to provide
them good quality health and education services. Also, their skills will be upgraded through
appropriate training programs.
extend access to modern financial services to labour - including considering the option of setting
up a dedicated Workers Bank.
bring together all stakeholders to review our Labour laws which are outdated, complicated and
even contradictory.
strengthen the Pension and Health Insurance safety netsfor all kinds of labourers.
Housing - No Longer a Mirage
We will roll out a massive Low cost Housing programmeto ensure that by the time the nation
32
completes 75 years of its Independence, every family will have a pucca house of its own. It will be an
innovatively designed scheme that dovetails various existing programmes and also encourages the
housing sector by appropriate policy interventions and credit availability including interest subventions,
where necessary.
Our proposed programme will further ensure that these houses are equipped with the basic facilities of
toilet, piped water supply, electricity and proper Access. To do this we will amongst others:
Prioritize all our resources towards this goal.
Leverage on land as a resource in urban areas and demand for unskilled labour in the rural areas.
Innovatively structure the programme to converge and dovetail various existing programmes, while
adding the missing links.
Simultaneously encourage the overall housing sector, through appropriate policy interventions and
credit availability and interest subvention schemes.
Physical Infrastructure - Better than the Best
should no longer be limited by its infrastructure. In fact, we have to create robust infrastructure,
which drives growth. For this purpose, we have to devote ourselves for a decade. We have to think big.
Also, looking to the expansion in our population as well as social and economic activities, we have to
build our infrastructure in a futuristic way. Growth of this sector means the growth of cement, steel,
electricity and many other associated industries and directly leads to massive job creation. To achieve
this, we will take following steps.
Work on the Freight Corridorsand attendant Industrial Corridorswill be expedited. This will
result in the faster movement of people and goods.
Remote states like those in the Northeastand Jammu and Kashmirwill be connected with the
rest of through world class highways and rail lines.
 Highway construction projects will be expedited, especially Borderand Coastal highways.
Every village will be connected through all-weather roads.
We shall modernize existing and operational Airports, and build new ones especially connecting
smaller towns and all tourism circuits. In addition, there is a potential for inland air transportation
to various remote and local locations in the country. Such air strips will be developed so that low
cost air travelling becomes possible within the country.
We will evolve an economic model of Port-led development. is blessed with a long coastline.
We will modernize existing ports on one hand, and develop new ones on the other - stringing
together our Sagar Malaproject.
Public Private Partnershipwould be encouraged to tap into private sector resources as well as
expertise. An institutional frameworkwould be established for the same; while regulators
would be given greater autonomy as well as accountability.
Next Generation Infrastructure
We will:
set up Gas Grids to make gas available to households and industry.
set up a  Optical-Fibre Network up to the village level; and Wi-Fi zones in public areas.
harness our advanced satellite technologyand expertise for development.
33
Transport
The realizes the importance of travel for the vibrancy of the economy and social unity. will:
Create a public transport system, which can reduce the dependence on personal vehicles for
transport, thereby, reducing cost, time to travel as well as ecological cost.
Launch an Integrated Public transport project which will include roadways, railways and waterways.
Develop waterways for passenger and cargo transport.
Develop  logistics network for faster movement of goods.
Railway
n Railways is the lifeline of the country. It will be modernized, strengthened and upgraded to serve
passengers as well as the country's economy. This will be done in a planned manner focusing on
 development, rather than political exigency.
Hinterland will be connected to the ports through strategic new Rail networks.
Agri Rail network will be established - with Train Wagons designed to cater to the specific needs
of perishable Agricultural products like milk and vegetables as well as light weight wagons for salt
movement.
Tourist Rail- including Pilgrimage Rail.
Railways Modernization, inducting of state-of-the-art technology.
Special focus on developing skilled human resources to meet future demand.
Prioritize Safetyand invest in long required overhaul of stressed infrastructure, strict norms and
warning systems.
Modernize and equip all stations with requisite infrastructure and public utilities.
Convert all unmanned crossings into manned crossings in a phased manner.
Initiate R&D for genous railways, coach design and signals.
We will launch Diamond Quadrilateral project- of High Speed Train network (bullet train).
Water - Make It Reach to All Homes, Farms and Factories
Trends cate that would be a 'water stressed' state by 2050, and the gap between the demand
and supply would be 50%. recognizes the seriousness of the issue. Also, most importantly,
potable drinking water is not available to the entire population despite more than six decades of
independence. Water is a dwindling resource, with the threat of water scarcity looming large. We will
address this in a comprehensive manner across multiple dimensions. remains committed to
giving high priority to water security.
Launch the 'Pradhan Mantri Gram Sinchayee Yojana' with a motto of 'har khet ko paani'. We will
launch multi-pronged 'water strategy'for reducing farmer's dependence on monsoon. Increase
irrigated landby completing the long pending irrigation projects on priority.
We will nurture ground water rechargeharnessing rain water to reduce dependence on ground
water.
Encourage efficient use, water conservation, recycling and rain water harvesting.
Sewage treatment plants to prevent the pollution of rivers.
Desalination plants for drinking watersupply in coastal cities.
34
Inter-linking of rivers based on feasibility.
Examination of ground water to eliminate toxic chemicals, particularly arsenic and fluorides.
To ensure drinking water security to all. We will:
Encourage setting up of drinking water supply grid in water scarce areas.
Promote decentralized, demand-driven, community-managed water resource management, water
supply and environmental sanitation.
Facilitatepiped water to all households.
Energy - Generate More, Use Rationally, Waste Less
realizes the need to focus on generation and distribution of power as a  security issue, so
that the growth is not negatively impacted due to supply issues in the energy sector. The overarching
goal of energy security is to ensure affordable energy for various consumer segments. Steps will be
taken to avoid over- dependence on any one fuel and ensure supplier diversity, to avoid reliance on one
supplier, country and developing genous capacities to meet the emerging needs.
will:
Come out with a responsible and comprehensive ' Energy Policy'.
Focus on development of energy infrastructure, human resource development and upgradation of
technology.
Take steps to maximize the potential of oil, gas, hydel power, ocean, wind, coal and nuclear
sources. considers energy efficiency and conservation crucial to energy security.
Set up small-hydro power generation projects to harness the hydropower that is not being used at
the moment. Small projects can be set up with local support and without displacement of the local
population.
Take Steps to increase the domestic coal exploration and production, to bridge the demand and
supply gap. Oil and gas explorations would also be expedited in the country. This will also help to
reduce the import bill.
Give a thrust to renewable sources of energy as an important component of 's energy mix.
Expand and strengthen the  solar mission.
Science and Technology - Innovates and Leads
has been a knowledge economy and has been a leader in science and technology from the
ancient times. now needs policies and programs to reclaim its global leadership position in
science and technology. recognizes the need to create an ecosystem for fundamental research
and innovation, keeping the objective of science with a human face in the service of the common man.
Science and technology has enormous potential to bridge the disparities between the urban and rural
, rich and poor. Scientific education and technology needs to be encouraged, promoted, practiced
and leveraged with renewed vision and vigour.
recognizes the central role of science and technology in raising the quality of life of the people of
the country, particularly of the disadvantaged sections of society in creating wealth for all, in making
globally competitive, in utilizing natural resources in a sustainable manner, in protecting the
environment and ensuring  security. We will also encourage and incentivize private sector
investments - both domestic and foreign, in science and technology and in high-end research aimed
35
towards innovation.
We will focus on the following:
ensuring food, agricultural, nutritional and environmental, wealth, health and energy security of the
people on a sustainable basis, using science and technology.
mounting a direct and sustained effort on the alleviation of poverty, enhancing livelihood security,
removal of hunger and malnutrition, reduction of drudgery and regional imbalances, both rural and
urban, and generation of employment, by using scientific and technological capabilities along with
our traditional knowledge pool.
encouraging research and innovation in areas of relevance for the economy and society, particularly
by promoting close and productive interaction between private and public institutions. Sectors
such as agriculture (particularly soil, water management, human and animal nutrition and fisheries),
water,  health,  education,  industry,  energy  including  renewable  energy,  communication  and
transportation would be accorded highest priority. Leveraging of technologies such as information
technology, biotechnology and material sciences would be done with special importance.
encouraging research and application to meet the challenges of climate change and for forecasting,
prevention and mitigation of natural hazards, particularly floods, cyclones, earthquakes, drought
and landslides.
promoting inter science and technology cooperation towards achieving the goals of 
development and security, and making it a key element of our inter relations.
devise schemes, programs and opportunities to encourage the youth to take scientific research
and innovation as a career.
provide work environment and professional opportunities in fundamental scientific research, to
make research careers more appealing, so that the nation can harness the best of brains for
scientific research leading to enhancing the  productivity and competitiveness and reverse
brain drain.
build world class, regional centres of excellence of scientific research in the field of nanotechnology,
material sciences, thorium technology and brain research.
create an ecosystem for multi-country and inter-disciplinary collaborative research, and establish
an Intellectual Property Rights Regime which maximizes the incentive for generation and protection
of intellectual property for all type of inventors.
achieving synergy between industry and scientific research. Autonomous technology transfer
organizations will be created as associate organizations of universities and  laboratories
to transfer the know-how generated by them to industry. Industry will be encouraged to adopt or
support educational and research institutions to help direct science and technology endeavours
towards tangible industrial goals.
promotion of innovation by creating a comprehensive  system of innovation.
genous knowledge, based on our long and rich tradition will be further developed and harnessed
for the purpose of wealth and employment generation
to promote science popularization schemes extensively.
bring the changes in secondary education to focus on application of science.
set an institute of Big data and Analytics for studying the impact of big data across sectors for
36
predictive science.
to do research for the eradication of tropical diseases.
Establish institutes of Technology for Rural Development.
establish a Central University dedicated to Himalayan Technology.
promote research and application of nuclear science in medicines, industry and agriculture.
We believe science and technology should be used to build a new and resurgent that continues
to maintain its strong democratic and spiritual traditions, that remains secure not only militarily but
also socially and economically. Our science and technology policy will be framed and implemented so
as to be in harmony with our worldview of the large human family. We will ensure that science and
technology truly uplifts the n people and indeed all humanity.
Flora, Fauna and Environment - Safeguarding Our Tomorrow
The present generation has to make this world a better place to live. A better place not only for us, but
for our future generations as well. We have to nurture the environment, institutions, people, resources
and amenities. We have to combine the past, the present and the future. We have to have a holistic
view of human life for sustainable development.
We have to develop the assets and amenities for ourselves in a manner that leaves an equally good or
even better environment for the future generations. We will put sustainabilityat the centre of our
thoughts and actions, working on the principle that inclusive growth cannot be limited by the barriers of
time and space - it has to be built on the foundations of the past, leverage on the opportunities of the
present, and preserve and enhance its resources for the future. We will take Climate Change mitigation
initiatives with all seriousness and work with the global community and institutions in this regard.
We will:
Encourage Cleaner production.
Cleaner fuelswill be promoted so as to bring down the pollution levels particularly in the cities.
The concept of pro-active 'Carbon Credit'will be promoted.
Ecological Auditof projects and pollution indexingof cities and townships will be done on
scientific basis.
Pollution control mechanisms will be set up on priority basis.
In addition to protecting the existing forests and wildlife reserves, the wastelands of the country
will be used for social forestry.
Guidelines for Green buildings and energy efficient work places will be brought out.
R&D and Human Resource Development in Environment Technologywill be promoted.
Set up fool proof mechanisms for protection and preservation of wild life.
Encourage citizen's participation in reforestation, agro-forestry and social forestry, through targeted
programmes.
Encourage and incentivize innovative garbage disposal and waste management practices, especially
recycling techniques.
The Himalayas
is committed to serious endeavors for creating a global awareness regarding the conservation of
37
Himalayas and will take the following steps:
Launch ' Mission on Himalayas' as  a  unique  programme  of  inter-governmental
partnership, in coordinated policy making and capacity building across states and sectors.
Create a 'Himalayan Sustainability Fund'.
Create a Central University dedicated to the Himalayan Technology.
Give due Importance to the programmes devised to arrest the melting of Himalayan glaciers from
which most of the rivers in North originate.
Natural &  Resources - Use When Required, Protect Where Necessary
n belief has been best encapsulated in Gandhiji's words that "there is enough for everyone's need
- but not for everyone's greed". Need is not the issue. Greed is. A country's progress depends upon its
resources and how they are harnessed and protected. Those in power have to realize they are just
trustees of the resources of the nation. The resources are neither meant for them nor for their masters.
If we bring this basic shift in thinking of the Government, which Mahatma Gandhi also advocated, all
problems will be resolved.
In recent years, it has been noticed that country's tangible and intangible resources have been looted
with impunity. The adverse result is being felt on two sides: Firstly, the proceeds of the resources have
not gone to the public exchequer. Secondly, because of this culture of usurping, the same resources
are not available for public purposes. The management of natural resources is marred with either
misappropriation or misallocation. This has to be set right.
We will set in place  policies on critical natural resources like coal, minerals, spectrum,
etc. - spelling out in black and white how much should be utilized at what time and pace; how this
should be strategically phased out to ensure sustainability; who should be allotted what responsibility
of extraction and at what cost.
State Governments will be taken into confidence for harnessing of these resources.
We will implement auctionof precious resources through efficient mechanisms including eauction.
Resource mapping, exploration and management will be undertaken through the use of technology.
Value additionwill be encouraged in all resources, instead of just marketing.
Secure ns - Zero Tolerance on Terrorism, Extremism and Crime
Comprehensive  security is not just about borders, but in its broad terms includes military
security; economic security; cyber security; energy, food and water and health security; and social
cohesion and harmony. To effectively address the issues of  security, we need to address the
issues of - human resources, science and technology, system of governance and money.
 security cannot be compartmentalized based on one of issues but needs a clear roadmap to
address it. Over the past decade, lack of a strong and visionary leadership, coupled with multiple
power centres, has failed to address the issue of  security, leading to a chaotic situation and
denting 's image in the inter arena.
has a sensitive neighbourhood and there are internal security issues. There have been intrusions
inside the LAC (Line of actual control), loss of squadrons of combat aircraft by the air force, witnessing
of a series of accidents by the Navy, leading to a loss in its combating capability built over many
decades, communal riots, Maoist attacks, increase in incidence of Pakistan backed terror groups in
38
, illegal immigration across the eastern border, and racists' attacks in the  capital. All
these are cations of surrendering of 's interest. This calls for a review and overhauling of the
current system. With the financial situation worsening, the issue of  security can acquire a
horrifying dimension.
recognizes the importance of identifying a clear roadmap to address the issue head-on, with
radical systemic changes.
Internal Security
will:
Revive the anti-terror mechanism that has been dismantled by the Congress, strengthen the role
of NIA and put a system in place for swift and fair trial of terror related cases.
Reform the  Security Council to make it the hub of all sector-related assessments. It will
be accountable for real-time intelligence dissemination. Digital and Cyber security will be a thrust
area.
Insulate intelligence agencies from political intervention and interference.
Completely revamp the intelligence gathering system by modernizing the intelligence department.
Provide the State governments with all assistance to modernize their respective police forces and
equip them with the latest technology. This will be taken up on a mission mode approach.
Strengthen and expand the Civil Defence and Home Guards mechanism to create a group of
citizens for community defence, self-defence and disaster management.
Encourage and strengthen NCC training at the college and University level.
Chalk a  plan in consultation and participation of the state Governments, to address the
challenges posed by the Maoist's insurgency. Talks with the insurgent groups will be conditional
and within the framework of the constitution.
Take urgent steps for the safety of the migrant workers and communities from the Northeast and
other states.
External Security - Its Boundary, Beauty and Bounty
will:
Address the issue of reforms with regards to defence equipment, support services, organizational
reforms and other related matters.
Address the increasing shortage of commissioned and non-commissioned staff in the defence
forces on a priority basis, in a time bound manner.
Implement one rank, one pension.
Build a War Memorial to recognize and honour the gallantry of our soldiers.
Take measures to make Short Service Commission more attractive.
Set up the  Maritime Authority which will be equipped with the best of infrastructure, and
will focus on coastal security.
Modernize armed forces, and increase the R&D in defence, with a goal of developing genous
defence technologies and fast tracking of defence purchases.
Deal with cross border terrorism with a firm hand.
Review and improve the border management. Punitive measures will be introduced to check illegal
39
immigration.
Set up four dedicated defence universities to meet the shortage of manpower.
Appoint a Veterans Commission to address the grievances of veterans, including reforming ECHS
and re-employment of ex-servicemen.
Ensure greater participation of Armed Forces in the decision-making process of the Ministry of
Defence.
Implement measures to improve the efficiency of Armed Forces Tribunals, and minimize appeals
by the Government.
Ensure that servicemen can register and vote from their place of posting.
Initiate the process of digitization of defence land in cantonment and in other places.
Defence Production
With its skilled human resources and technical talent, can emerge as a global platform for
defence hardware manufacture and software production. will strengthen the Defence Research
and Development Organization (DRDO); encourage private sector participation and investment, including
FDI in selected defence industries.
Technology transfer in defence manufacturingwill be encouraged to the maximum.
We will find solutions to the problems hampering the growth of the defence sector.
We will encourage domestic industry to have a larger share in design and production of military
hardware and platforms for both domestic use and exports, in a competitive environment.
Independent Strategic Nuclear Programme
believes that the strategic gains acquired by during the Atal Bihari Vajpayee regime on the
nuclear programme have been frittered away by the Congress. Our emphasis was, and remains on,
beginning of a new thrust on framing policies that would serve 's  interest in the 21st
century. We will follow a two-pronged independent nuclear programme, unencumbered by foreign
pressure and influence, for civilian and military purposes, especially as nuclear power is a major
contributor to 's energy sector.
will:
Study in detail 's nuclear doctrine, and revise and update it, to make it relevant to challenges
of current times.
Maintain a credible minimum deterrent that is in tune with changing geostatic realities.
Invest in 's genous Thorium Technology Programme.
Foreign Relations - Nation First, Universal Brotherhood
believes a resurgent must get its rightful place in the comity of nations and inter
institutions. The vision is to fundamentally reboot and reorient the foreign policy goals, content and
process, in a manner that locates 's global strategic engagement in a new paradigm and on a
wider canvass, that is not just limited to political diplomacy, but also includes our economic, scientific,
cultural, political and security interests, both regional and global, on the principles of equality and
mutuality, so that it leads to an economically stronger , and its voice is heard in the inter
fora.
believes that political stability, progress and peace in the region are essential for south Asia's
growth and development. The Congress led UPA has failed to establish enduring friendly and cooperative
40
relations with 's neighbours. 's relations with traditional allies have turned cold. and its
neighbours have drifted apart. Instead of clarity, we have seen confusion. The absence of statecraft has
never been felt so acutely as today. is seen to be floundering, whereas it should have been
engaging with the world with confidence. The collapse of the n economy has contributed to the
sorry state of foreign affairs in no small measure.
We will build a strong, self-reliant and self-confident , regaining its rightful place in the comity of
nations. In this, we will be firstly guided by our centuries old tradition of olq/kSo dqVqEcde~. At the same
time, our foreign policy will be based on best  interests. We will create a web of allies to
mutually further our interests. We will leverage all our resources and people to play a greater role on
the inter high table.
has long failed to duly appreciate the full extent and gamut of itssoft powerpotential. There is
a need to integrate our soft power avenues into our external interchange, particularly, harnessing and
focusing on the spiritual, cultural and philosophical dimensions of it. has always played a major
role in world affairs, offering a lot to the World. This has been its tradition since time immemorial. The
magnetic power of has always been in its ancient wisdomand heritage, elucidating principles
likeharmonyand equity. This continues to be equally relevant to the world today in today's times of
Soft power. We will adopt Proactive Diplomacyto spread the same. was reckoned not only as
Vishwaguru but also a vibrant trading society. Our ancestors used to trade with foreign nations through
the routes of sea, centuries ago. This was based on the strength of our business acumen and integrity,
our products and crafts. The symbols of our ancient civilizations stand as a testimony to our architectural
and urban planning excellence. We will revive Brand with the help of our strengths of 5 T's:
Tradition, Talent, Tourism,Trade and Technology.
Guiding Principles of our Foreign Policy will be:
Equations will be mended through pragmatism and a doctrine of mutually beneficial and interlocking
relationships, based on enlightened  interest.
We will champion uniform inter opinion on issues like Terrorism and Global Warming.
Instead of being led by big power interests, we will engage proactively on our own with countries in
the neighbourhood and beyond.
In our neighbourhoodwe will pursue friendly relations. However, where required we will not
hesitate from taking strong stand and steps.
We will work towards strengthening Regional forums like SAARC and ASEAN.
We will continue our dialogue, engagement and cooperation, with global forums like BRICS, G20.
IBSA, SCO and ASEM. States will be encouraged to play a greater role in diplomacy; actively
building relations with foreign countries to harness their mutual cultural and commercial strengths.
Also,
We will expand and empower our pool of diplomats, ensuring our message is taken to the world
and our great nation represented on the whole in a befitting manner.
The NRIs, PIOs and professionals settled abroad are a vast reservoir to articulate the 
interests and affairs globally. This resource will be harnessed for strengthening Brand .
shall remain a natural home for persecuted Hindus and they shall be welcome to seek refuge
here.
41
Cultural Heritage
Ram Mandir: reiterates its stand to explore all possibilities within the framework of the constitution
to facilitate the construction of the Ram Temple in Ayodhya.
Ram Setu: Ram Setu is a part of our cultural heritage and also of strategic importance due to its vast
thorium deposits. These facts will be taken into consideration while taking any decision on 'SethuSamudram Channel' project.
Ganga: River Ganga is a symbol of faith in , and has a special place in the n psyche. It is
Mukti dayini. In addition it is also Jivan dayini for the parts of the country it flows. People and cattle
depend on it for agriculture, fodder and drinking water. Pure water of the Ganga are thus essential for
the spiritual as well as physical well being of .
Unfortunately however, even after decades of independence, the Ganga continues to be polluted and is
drying. commits to ensure the cleanliness, purity and uninterrupted flow of the Ganga on priority.
In addition, a massive 'Clean Rivers Programme'will be launched across the country driven by
people's participation.
Cow and its Progeny:In view of the contribution of cow and its progeny to agriculture, socio-economic
and cultural life of our country, the Department of Animal Husbandry will be suitably strengthened and
empowered for the protection and promotion of cow and its progeny.
Necessary legal framework will be created to protect and promote cow and its progeny.
A  Cattle Development board will be set up to implement a Programme for the improvement
of genous livestock breeds.
Heritage Sites:We will provide appropriate resources for the maintenance and restoration of all
 heritage sites, and to prevent their vandalisation in any form. The digitization of archives and
archeological and museological records would be initiated. A  Mission for beautifying and
improving the infrastructure and amenities at pilgrimage centres of all faiths will be launched.
Languages:n Languages are repositories of our rich literature, history, culture, art and scientific
achievements. Many of our dialects are important source for knowing our heritage. would promote
n languages, and put measures for the development of all n languages, so that they become
a powerful vehicle for creating a knowledge society.
Uniform Civil Code
Article 44 of the constitution of lists Uniform Civil Code as one of the Directive Principles of state
policy. believes that there cannot be gender equality till such time adopts a Uniform Civil
Code, which protects the rights of all women, and the reiterates its stand to draft a Uniform Civil
Code, drawing upon the best traditions and harmonizing them with the modern times.
42
Conclusion - Amritmay Bharat
We aim to build a modern, prosperous and vibrant - Ek Bharat, Shreshtha Bharat, based on our
ethos and values. We have to convert ourselves into a knowledge based society and economy, powered
by experience, tools of technology and energy of our people. commits itself to this task and
promises to work relentlessly towards this goal, for which we are seeking sixty months.
In 2022, we will be celebrating 75 years of 's Independence. In n culture, this is celebrated as
Amrit Mahotsav.For us, every day and every step, every journey and every process will be dedicated
to make Amritmay Bharat. And all this will be done by all of us, for all of us!
This is not the time to sit back. This is the time when each of us has to get up and contribute our might
to bring the change.
Let's come together, vote to make Ek Bharat, Shreshtha Bharat.
Jai Hind!
Vande Mataram!
Time for Change
Time for Modi