	  The Only Choice 2  or BJP 4 The UPA Report Card 6 Landmark Legislation 2009-2014 8 Our Pledge A 15 Point Agenda for Socio-economic and Political Transformation 10 The Detailed Action Plan 2014-2019 14 An Appeal1. A New Future for the Hands that Build the Nation 142. Economic Growth 14 An Economic Roadmap for 2014-2019 15 The   ’s 100 Day Agenda for Growth 16 Accelerating Job Creation and Skill Development 173. Protecting the Interests of Labour 194. Right to Health 205. Empowering Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes 216. Women’s Empowerment and Protection of Children 247. Safeguarding Minorities 268. Youth and Student Agenda 27 Building the Best Education System in the World for our Students 28 Promoting Sports 29 Other Youth Issues 309. Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 3110. Agriculture and Farmer Welfare 3211. Accelerating Industrial and Manufacturing Growth 3412. Infrastructure 36 Transport 36 Energy 3713. Urban Development 3814. Housing 3915. Environment 4016. Innovation, Information and Communication Technology 4117. Fighting Corruption 4318. Governance Reforms 43 Electoral Reforms 44 Legal and Judicial Reforms 44 Police Reforms 4419. Internal Security 4620. Defence and Welfare of Ex-Servicemen 4621. Foreign Policy 47Table of Contents The    has pioneered an entirely new way in whichpolitical party election manifestos are prepared. It is our firm belief that the   Manifesto must reflect the voice and aspirations ofthe people and a new vision for the country.There were several consultations held across the country over a five-monthperiod (from October, 2013 to March, 2014) with different stakeholders, toget their inputs on India’s future growth, development and inclusion agenda.The  Vice President Shri Rahul Gandhi participated in several ofthese interactions including those with representatives from Scheduled Castes,Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, minorities, women organisations,youth, labour, industry, Panchayat representatives, ex-servicemen, railwayporters, rickshaw pullers, salt-pan workers and farmers. In addition to this adedicated website (www.incmanifesto.in) was established to invite suggestionsfrom all citizens for the Manifesto. A separate website for the “ StudentManifesto” was also created.We received tens of thousands of suggestions through these consultations, onthe websites and social media platforms, phones, emails, etc. These suggestionswere carefully considered and have been included, wherever feasible.We believe this unique exercise has made the Manifesto inclusive and fullyreflective of the voice of the people of India.The Open Manifesto ProcessPathbreaking Political Reform2 3The    has madeseminal contributions to India’s unity,integrity, secular polity and democraticfederalism. We have championed the rightsof the weaker sections, created conditions forfaster economic growth and have been theprincipal instrument of social and economicchange, the preferred political choice forcrores of women and men.Our central values resonate the very idea ofIndia, that has come to us over the centuries,an India that rejoices in and celebratesits many diversities, and builds on thesediversities to strengthen the bonds of unitythrough secularism, pluralism, inclusion andsocial justice. This is the India thatMahatma Gandhi envisaged. Thisis the India for which our FreedomFighters gave their all. This is theIndia that the   has always dedicateditself to. Ours is the one Party witha history of a liberal philosophythat has enabled the country tobuild strong political and economicinstitutions and transform itself.In the 1950’s, the   put India on the path ofindustrialisation through the public sector,ensuring both rapid and balanced regionalgrowth across the face of our country.A massive infrastructure for science andtechnology was also established. In the 1960’s,the Green Revolution was launched to makeIndia self-sufficient in food grains and a directassault on poverty. In the 1970’s, further gainswere made through the Green Revolution anda White Revolution was unleashed that wasto make India the world’s largest producer ofmilk. In the 1980’s, economic reforms werelaunched in response to new challenges, tomodernise the  economy and bringabout the information and conmunicationstechnology revolution. In the 1990’s, radicaleconomic reforms were instituted leading toaccelerated economic growth and widespreadeconomic and social transformation. At theturn of the millennium, we brought abouta “Regime of Rights” marking a paradigmshift in India’s politics and development.Beginning with the Right to Information,Right to Work (Mahatma Gandhi Rural Employment Guarantee Act), Right toEducation and the Right to Food, we havelaunched a radical progressive economic andsocial development discourse.The depth and breadth of its political andadministrative experience makes the   most intrinsically awareand closely associated with the beliefs, andprinciples and need of the people of India.We are the Party that has always believed inthe idealism and leadership abilities of theyouth. We have remained connected withtheir aspirations and have been inspired bytheir restless vibrancy.Our vision is one of inclusive and sustainablegrowth fuelled by agricultural development,regional balance, progress in backwardareas and a strong conviction that in orderto prosper every citizen must have theopportunity to evolve to the best of her orhis ability. Ours is a Nation of incredible butoften untapped talent that needs and deservesto be unleashed.We envision an India where power wouldhave been devolved to the grassroots and tothe marginalized so that they can shape theirown destiny.We envision an India charting a new futurerather than rewriting its past; living inharmony, not in turmoil; thriving in peacerather than suffering in conflict; imbued withhumility, not with arrogance.We envision an India where the governmentserves the people rather than where peopleserve the government.We believe in a simple universal truth equityand opportunity for all.The    is the onlyParty that believes that economic growth andCoNg ressThe Onl y Choicecommunal harmony, and economic growthand social justice, are two sides of the samecoin and must always go hand-in-hand.The    is the onlyParty that combines experience and youth,wisdom and exuberance, achievement andambition.The    seeks a renewedmandate on the strength of its heritage, itsrecord of service, both in and out of power,and its clear vision for the future.4 5Since it formation, 128 years ago,the    hasspoken for every section of society and has mirrored India’s “unityin diversity”.The   ’ssecular and liberal ethos has a placefor each and every .Ours is an inclusive vision.The BJP’s narrow and communalperspective denies equality to all.Theirs is an exclusionarydoctrine.The    standsin sharp contrast to the divisive anddisruptive ideology of the BJP. We havealways been the secular and progressiveforce in this country and strived to uniteall religions, castes and communities in theideological battle against those who wouldpolarize and divide our society.Our democratic Constitution andinstitutions are the cornerstone of ModernIndia. All of us, who wish to build a betterIndia and rid the country of poverty andcorruption, must respect these institutionsand work through them. They are thelegitimate instruments in our hands.No individual or authority can replacethe values and processes of democraticgovernance.Peace cannot be constructed on conflict.Societies cannot be built on injustice andhatred.CONGRE SS or bjpSecular Liberal ism vs Narrow-minded CommunalismInclusive Democracy vs Divisive AuthoritarianismAware of the challenges thrown up by theundemocratic and exclusionary politics ofthe BJP, particularly in the recent past, the   is committedto confronting these challenges withdetermination.We do not respond by subvertingdemocratic institutions and blockingParliament session after session, year afteryear. We do not respond by turning peopleagainst each other and lighting the fires ofcommunal hatred. We do not respond byproposing either that the structures ofdemocracy be handed to one single personor that they be viciously undermined.The    respondsthrough legitimate peaceful, democraticand Constitutional means. These are thepillars on which our great Nation stands. Itis for this reason that the   is the only natural choice for thepeople of India.6 7It was the tireless campaign and visionof Sonia Gandhi, President of the  , that broughttogether and gave shape to the UnitedProgressive Alliance (UPA) headed byPrime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singhin May 2004.The work of the -led UPAgovernment was appreciated and the peopleof India gave us a renewed mandate, with alarger majority, in 2009.Chairperson of the UPA, Sonia Gandhi, andPrime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, hastranslated into reality the pledges we made inMay 2009.The 2009 Mandate was for socially inclusiveeconomic growth with a focus on jobs andlivelihoods, and social justice.This has been achieved in substantial measure.The 2009 Mandate was to take forward thecommitment made by our government in2004 promising “A New Deal for Rural India.”This has been achieved in substantial measure.The 2009 Mandate was to safeguard and advancethe interests of India’s farmers and create anenvironment conducive to their prosperity.This has been achieved in substantial measure.The 2009 Mandate was for empoweringthe poor and the marginalized, especiallyScheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, OtherBackward Classes, minorities and women.This has been achieved in substantial measure.The 2009 Mandate was to open the doors ofeducation and skills, and provide access toimmense opportunities they hold out for ourbiggest asset, our youth.This has been achieved in substantial measure.The 2009 Mandate was for maintaining peaceand security and for fighting the challengesthrown up by undemocratic, divisive andexclusionary political and social interests.This has been achieved in substantial measure.the upareport card The -led UPA has brought 14crore people out of poverty in the lastten years. The rate of poverty declinehas tripled as compared to the precedingdecade. This is the greatest achievement ofthe UPA governments, and we are proudof it. In the ten years of UPA-I and UPA-II,India achieved an average annual growthrate of 7.5%. During the NDA tenure theaverage annual growth rate was 5.9%. Today, we produce 263 million tonnes offood grains. Ten years ago, at the end ofthe NDA tenure its was 213 million tonnesof food grains. Today, the installed power capacity is234,600 MW. Ten years ago, it was lessthan half at 112,700 MW. Today, the number of mobile subscribershas crossed 95 crore. Ten years ago, it wasa mere 3.36 crore subscribers. Telephonedensity in rural areas has increased 26times. Today, coal production is 554 milliontonnes per year. Ten years ago, it was 361million tonnes per year. Today, we have 389,578 km of rural roadsunder the Pradhan Mantri Gram SadakYojana (PMGSY). This is more than 7times the 51,511 km of rural roads tenyears ago. Today, the Cental Government’s spendingon healthcare is Rs. 36,322 crore, 5 timesWe let the record speak for itself.more than the Rs. 7,248 crore it was tenyears ago. Today, minorities have 43,52,000 bankaccounts in 121 districts of the country.The total volume of lending stands at Rs.66,500 crore. Ten years ago, minorities had14,15,000 bank accounts. The total volumeof lending was just Rs. 4,000 crore. Today, 41,16,000 women Self-Help-Groups have been credit linked to banks.Ten years ago it was only 9,71,182. Today, the total credit to small businessesstands in excess of Rs. 5,27,000 crore. Tenyears ago, credit to small businesses stoodat below Rs. 80,000 crore. Today, the Central Government’sexpenditure on education is Rs. 79,451crore. Ten years ago, it was Rs. 10,145crore. Today, the total value of India’s intertrade stands at US $ 800 billion. Ten yearsago, it was US $ 142 billion.8 9The   -led UPAgovernment has had an unmatched recordwhen it comes to the passage of significant,historic and pathbreaking legislation. The   is a Party that takesits commitments to the people as sacred.The Party has worked to realise almost allthe promises made to the people in its earlierManifestos and campaigns1. The    ledthe charge to enact a unique andunprecedented law to safeguard foodsecurity for the poorest. The Food Security Act marked the realisationof over a decade of work and has beenhailed as a visionarylaw by the people.2. The seminal Right toFair Compensationand Transparency inLand Acquisition,Rehabilitation andResettlement Act,2013 - a key campaignpromise of the   in 2009 - wasenacted after two years of nationwideconsultations. This law was a historicvictory for our brothers and sistersworking in the agriculture sector. Thelaw ensures that land cannot be acquiredwithout the land owners consent,promises up to four times the prevailingmarket value as compensation and repealsthe Land Acquisition Act of 1894.3. The    led the wayin bringing about historic reform withregard to women’s rights in the form ofthe Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2013and the salutary Protection of Womenfrom Sexual Harassment at Workplace Act,2013. These laws made the system moresensitive to the challenges faced by ourwomen. Penalties have increased and newcrimes were included to make the definitionmore women friendly so that the law betterserves the interests of the aggrieved.4. In a bid to bring greater clarity onthe subject, the -led UPAGovernment enacted a new CompaniesAct, 2013. This new law, resulting fromcomprehensive consultations with allstakeholders brings about radical changesthat will stimulate entrepreneurship,make it easier to start new businessesand encourage Corporate SocialResponsibility.5. Mindful that our Nation’s citizens, andparticularly our senior citizens, deservegreater security with regard to theirpension funds, the -led UPAGovernment enacted the Pension FundRegulatory and Development AuthorityAct, 2013, to establish a regulator toensure these funds are protected fromunscrupulous individuals.6. The    has alwayslooked to the people for guidance inthe discharge of its duties. The Lokpaland Lokayukta Act, 2013 was born outof a determination to give the peoplea strong, independent authority to actas a watchdog against administrativecorruption. This authority empowers thepeople by giving them a high-poweredforum to tackle corruption in thebureaucracy and the political system.7. In one earliest actions on being re-elected,the -led UPA governmentpassed the Right of Children to Free andCompulsory Education Act in 2009. Thislaw, which guarantees free educationin primary schools, also puts in placeprovisions for minimum standards forthe establishment of new neighbourhoodschools.8. The   , whichhas been firmly dedicated to the causeof protecting our nation’s environmentand forests, enacted the  GreenTribunal Act, 2009 to establish a specialfast track court to hear disputes related tothese issues.9. The    piloted andpassed the Street Vendors (Protection ofLivelihood & Regulation) Act, 2014. ThisAct will protect livelihood rights of lakhsof street vendors.10. The Prohibition of Employmentas Manual Scavengers and theirRehabilitation Act, 2013 not onlyprescribes stringent punishment foremploying manual scavengers but alsohas provisions for rehabilitation of thesefamilies. An age-old blot on our societywill finally be erased.LAND MARK LEGISLA TION 2009 -201410 111. We will endeavour to bring around twothirdsof our population – the skilled handsthat build India – into the middle class,through a package of basic rights for allworkers – formal and informal, organizedand unorganized, regular and contractual.Our aim will be to provide them andall low-income families with economicsecurity and a minimum standard of livingto uplift their condition. The charter ofminimum socio-economic rights we willput in place includesa. Right to Healthb. Right to Pensionc. Right to Homestead or Housingd. Right to Social Securitye. Right to Dignity andhumane workingconditionsf. Right to Entrepreneurshipthat willprotect and assist allthose who seek tobecome entrepreneursThese new rightswill supplement theother rights established under UPA-Iand UPA-II - Right to Food; Right toInformation; Right to Education; Right toEmployment; Rights to fight corruption(Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act as well asWhistleblower Protection Act); Right toIdentity (Aadhaar) and the Right to directreceipt of welfare benefits (Aapka Paisa,Aapke Haath – Direct Benefits Transfers).Together, these rights will provide aneconomic platform for people below themiddle class to transform their lives andto transform India primarily through theirown effort, not through any handouts ofthe government.2. To support the Right to Health, the   will increasehealth expenditure to 3% of GDP andprovide universal and quality health carefor all s (including free medicines).To support the right to homestead/housing, we will ensure affordable andquality housing for all. The Indira AwaasYojana and the Rajiv Awaas Yojana will beexpanded to cover all poor rural and urbanhouseholds.3. Continuing our record of delivering India’shighest growth rates, we will restore Indiato 8% plus growth rate within 3 yearsa. We will ensure that India has a globallycompetitive business and investmentfriendlyenvironment.b. We will continue to take firm actionto control inflation even in a difficultglobal economic scenario.c. We will promote an open andcompetitive economy, open to globaland domestic competition.d. Our vision is building India as the worldleader in manufacturing. We will ensurea 10% growth rate in the manufacturingsector with a special emphasis on smalland medium enterprises.e. We will continue on the path of makingIndia a world leader in agriculturalproduction and agro-industry, takingadvantage of our  endowmentsand the genius of our farmers. Wewill focus on increasing agricultureproductivity and farmer incomes byincreasing investments in irrigation,agricultural value chains, cold storageand warehousing, etc.f. We will introduce the Goods andServices Tax Bills and a new DirectTax Code Bill in Parliament and ensurethey are enacted within one year.g. We will ensure that the unpredictablerisk of retroactive taxation is avoided.h. We will invest more than 1 trilliondollars over the next decade onupgrading India’s power, transportand other development infrastructure.We will support more transparent,competitive and better-regulated PublicPrivate Partnerships for both hard andsoft infrastructure development.i. We will promote a more flexible labourpolicy as needed for maintainingcompetitiveness, while moving towardsinter labour standards for ourworkers.j. We will promote greater integrationwith the global economy and encourageForeign Direct Investment, especiallyin labour intensive sectors.k. We will ensure that growth is sociallyresponsible, and comes from genuinevalue addition, not from stripping ournatural resources or from underpayingour labour.l. We will ensure that all our towns andGram Panchayats are connected withhigh-speed broadband connectivitywithin 18 months.m. Serious and systematic efforts havebeen made by the -led UPAgovernment to track down and recoverblack money. This determined effortwill continue unabated. We will appointa Special Envoy to pursue this agenda.4. We will provide skillstrainingto 10 crore youthand provide them withemployment opportunitiesover the next 5 years.5. We will ensure that everycitizen has a bank accountwithin the next five years.6. We will implement the Youth Policy that sets a new visionfor leadership development amongst youthand for the development of sports. We willbring enhanced focus on education for ouryouth and our students.a. We will expand higher educationopportunities with a focus on studentsfrom low-income families.b. We will scale up skill development andtraining to open up new opportunitiesfor upward economic mobility for ourpeople.c. We will open up our higher educationsystem to investment from Indiaand from abroad and bring the bestOUR PLEDGE A 15 POIN T AGENDA FOR SOCIO -ECONO MICAND POLI TICAL TRANSFOR MATION12 13available knowledge and teaching toour youth.d. We will move our focus from ‘SarvaShiksha Abhiyan’ to ‘Shreshth ShikshaAbhiyan’, making “quality” the centreof our agendae. We will strengthen the implementationof the Right to Education, ensureuniversal enrolment in secondaryeducation, and reduce drop-out ratesin middle and secondary levels.7. The protection of minorities is at thecore of the ethos of our country. TheCommunal Violence Bill, which wasdrafted and introduced by the  ,remains an importantcommitment. Wewill work towardsits enactment at theearliest.8. We will continue ourfocus on empowermentof women and fight fortheir security (suraksha),self-respect and dignity (samman), andequality (samanata).a. We will ensure the passage of theWomen’s Reservation Bill.b. We will initiate immediate actionto formulate a Citizen’s Charter forWomen’s Safety and Security.c. We will provide upto Rs 1 lakh as lowinterest loans to women through Self-Help-Groups for livelihood activities.9. We will enhance legal protection andresource allocation for the ScheduledCastes and Scheduled Tribes.a. We will enact central legislation onthe Scheduled Castes and ScheduledTribes Sub Plans to ensure focusedspending of funds on weaker sections.b. We will ensure the passage of theScheduled Castes and ScheduledTribes (Prevention of Atrocities)Amendment Bill, 2013.10. We will strongly protect the interestsof the Other Backward Classes,especially those amongst them that aremost deprived. We will establish a newcommission to inquire into the conditionof the most backward and marginalizedOther Backward Class communities whohave not adequately received the benefitsof government programmes; and willrecommend corrective measures.11. We will strengthen the legal andinstitutional framework to protect ourchildren. We will improve the workingconditions of Anganwadi and relatedworkers in whose care our nation entrustsour most precious asset – our youngestcitizens.12. We will give a major impetus toplanned urbanization, creating inclusivecities, revamping urban governance,empowering mayors, increasing lowincomehousing and making largerinvestments in urban infrastructure,especially in multi-modal transport.13. We will accelerate governance reformincluding legal, judicial and electoralreform, building on the momentum ofthe last few months.a. We will enact the remaining anticorruptionand accountability billsthat were blocked by the opposition;b. We will ensure the immediatepassage of The Right of Citizensfor Time Bound Delivery of Goodsand Services and Redressal of theirGrievances Bill, Prevention ofBribery of Foreign Public Officialsand Officials of Public InterOrganisations Bill, Prevention ofCorruption (Amendment) Bill, ThePublic Procurement Bill, JudicialStandards and Accountability Bill andthe Judicial Appointments Bill.c. We will implement a strategy for legaland judicial reform that will enhancequality, responsiveness and timelinessof the judicial system.d. We will ensure that therecommendations of the secondAdministrative Reforms Commissionare implemented in letter and spiritand monitored at every step.e. We will develop a consensus and bringabout legislative amendments towardseffective and meaningful electoralreforms.14. We are committed to a series of specificlegislative, administrative and regulatorymeasures to protect our environment,an endowment entrusted to us for thebenefit of future generations. We will setup a  Environmental Appraisaland Monitoring Authority (NEAMA),a professional agency to conductenvironmental appraisals in a time-boundand transparent manner.15. The   believesmodernisation ofour defence forces isimperative. The   shallensure that the processof procuring the finest,and most state-ofthe-art equipment iscarried out efficientlyand transparently, while ensuring rapiddevelopment of our domestic defenceindustry. We will continue to protectand advance the interests of our defencepersonnel and ex-servicemen. We willcontinue to follow an unwavering pro-India foreign policy, enhance bilateralrelationships with our neighbours andfriendly nations, enhance commercialties and strive to mobilize support forpermanent membership in the UnitedNations Security Council.OUR PLEDGE A 15 POIN T AGENDA FOR SOCIO -ECONO MICAND POLI TICAL TRANSFOR MATION14 151. A New Future forthe Hands that Buildthe NationIt is because of the   that employees in the organised sector havebeen fully protected through legislation andare entitled to social security in differentways. While organised sector employmentmust expand, the reality is that employmentin the unorganised sector contributes close to94% of India’s labour force.In recent years, with the expansion ofemployment opportunities because of rapideconomic growth, this segment has expanded.In recognition ofthis, in 2008, the-led UPAgovernment passedthe UnorganisedWorkers’ SocialSecurity Act, 2008.The  believes that it is time to scale up theseprogrammes across the country so that allworkers derive benefits from both legislationand programmes in the next five years. Toensure a basic rights and welfare packagefor all working people, the   will ensure1. Enforcement of Minimum Wage laws;2. Provision of Pension cover;3. Provision of life and disability cover,health and maternity benefits – freemedicine, old age protection, ProvidentFund, employment injury benefit,housing, education schemes for children,and old age homes;annum, compared to 5.9 % delivered by theNDA, even as poverty has declined three timesfaster. The growth under the -ledUPA has been faster and more inclusive thanany earlier period in India’s history. And it isnot just the acceleration of growth that givesthe    satisfaction. Inkeeping with the long-standing tradition ofthe   , we have madethe growth process more socially inclusivethan it has ever been.The UPA governments’ record on growth isunparalleled.However, given the economic slowdownin the last few years, driven by the globalfinancial crisis, bringing India back on trackto achieve 8% inclusive growth will be anoverriding priority of the next -ledgovernment.An Economic Roadmap for 2014-2019The Finance Minister in his budget speechearlier this year has laid out a roadmap of tenimportant tasks to be undertaken by the nextgovernment. The   affirms its commitment to this roadmapwhich is outlined belowi. Fiscal Consolidation We will achieve thetarget of fiscal deficit of 3 % of GrossDomestic Product (GDP) by 2016-17,and remain below that level always.ii. Current Account Deficit Our CurrentAccount Deficit can be financed only byforeign investment, whether it is ForeignDirect Investment (FDI) or ForeignInstitutional Investors (FII) or ExternalCommercial Borrowing (ECB) or anyother kind of foreign inflow. Hence,there is no room for any aversion toforeign investment.iii. Price Stability and Growth In adeveloping economy we must accept thatwhen our aim is high growth there willbe a moderate level of inflation. ReserveBank of India must strike a balancebetween pricestability and growthwhile formulatingmonetary policy.iv. InfrastructureWe will rebuildour infrastructureand add a hugequantity of newi n f r a s t r u c t u r e.Every provenmodel must be adopted. The PublicPrivate Partnership (PPP) model must bemade more transparent and competitiveand more widely used. New financingstructures will be created for long termfunds and pooling of investments.v. Manufacturing We will focus onmanufacturing and especially onmanufacturing for export. We proposethat all taxes, Central and State, whichgo into an exported product shouldbe waived or rebated. We also proposethat there should be a minimum tariffprotection so that there is an incentive tomanufacture goods in India rather thanimport them into India.4. Creation of a working environment thatenables all such workers to carry outwork without harassment. We will alsoensure humane working conditions;5. Strengthening of collective bargaining;6. Programmes for upgrading skills andincome including use of improvedtechnology.2. E conomic GrowthThe    is committedto achieving 8 % growth per year, within3 years, to be sustained over the next twodecades.The   ’s agenda isone of social and economic transformation.Growth is essential for this transformationto happen and for it to be truly meaningful.It is economic growth that creates jobs forour youth. It is economic growth that givesus the resources to invest in our social welfareprogrammes and infrastructure development.The nature and quality of growth is equallyimportant to ensure that the gains of growthare equitably distributed.Over the last ten years, the -led UPAgovernments have pursued and deliveredrapid and inclusive economic growth. Wehave delivered economic growth of 7.5 % perThe Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201916 17vi. Financial Sector Reforms Therecommendations of the FinancialSector Legislative Reforms Commissionthat require no change in legislation mustbe implemented immediately and, for theother recommendations, we must draw atimetable for passing legislation.vii. Subsidies Given the limited resources,and the many claims on the resources,we must choose the subsidies that areabsolutely necessary and give them onlyto the absolutely deserving. We willalso consider introducing sensible usercharges because many more people arewilling to pay for better quality services,for example, uninterrupted power andbetter qualitytrain services.We will usethis moneysaved toexpand health,education andinfrastructure.viii. UrbanisationOur citieswill becomeungovernable, and perhaps unlivable, ifwe do not address the decay in our cities.Cities have wealth, cities also createwealth. That wealth should be tapped forresources to rebuild the cities with a newmodel of governance.ix. Skill Development Skill developmentmust rank alongside secondary education,university education, total sanitation anduniversal health care in the priorities ofthe government.x. Sharing responsibility between States andCentre States have the fiscal space to bear areasonable proportion of the financial costsof implementing flagship programmes andmust willingly do so, so that the Centralgovernment can allocate more resourcesfor subjects such as defence, railways, highways and telecommunicationsthat are its exclusive responsibility.The   ’s100 Day Agenda for GrowthWhile the above presents a medium-termagenda for reform, the immediate priority isto ensure that the economy gets back on trackto the target of 8 % growth.While consolidating on the announcementsand progress made over the last year, wecommit to implementing the followingagenda within 100 days of forming the nextgovernment1. Introduce the Goods and Services Tax(GST) Bills in Parliament and ensure theyare enacted within 1 year. GST is likely toincrease the aggregate revenue which willbe used to fund the extra investment ininfrastructure, health and education.2. Ensure that we are on track to pass a newDirect Tax Code Bill in the first year ofthe new Lok Sabha.3. Announce a detailed Jobs Agenda toensure that we create 10 crore new jobsand entrepreneurship opportunities forour youth.4. Amend the Fiscal Responsibility andBudget Management (FRBM) Act tocodify a credible commitment of thegovernment to achieve fiscal deficitof 3 % of GDP by 2016-17, and staybelow that always. Set up an independent Fiscal Responsibility Councilthat will submit an annual report tothe Parliament on the progress made inachieving our fiscal commitments.5. Building on the success of the CabinetCommittee on Investment and the ProjectMonitoring Group in clearing stalledinvestment proposals, set up a Investment Facilitation Authority, apermanent body headed by the PrimeMinister, and supported by a full-timesecretariat, with the explicit mandate ofidentifying delayed projects and resolvinginter-ministerial issues to enable rapid andtransparent approvals to large projects,especially in the infrastructure sector.6. Bring a Bill to set up a Environmental Appraisal and MonitoringAuthority to conduct rigorous and timeboundenvironmental appraisals andrecommend environmental clearanceswhere appropriate in a time-bound andtransparent manner.7. Set up a Regulatory Reform Task Forcefor a review of all regulatory processesof central government ministries withthe intent of repealing unnecessaryprocesses, streamlining the regulatorystructures and improving ease of doingbusiness in India.8. Put out a clear policy on tax treatment offoreign firms and Merger & Acquisitions(M & A) transactions while ensuringthat taxes are paid by multi/foreign entities inthe jurisdiction inwhich the profitsare earned.9. Lay out aclear roadmapfor dealing withimmediate issuesof public sectorbanks, includingrecapitalisation, Non-Performing Assets(NPAs), operational autonomy, humanresource development and successionplanning in each bank.10. Implement the recommendations ofthe Financial Sector Legislative ReformsCommission that require no changein legislation and lay out a timeline forpassing required legislation.Accelerating Job Creation and SkillDevelopmentThe landmark ‘ ManufacturingPolicy’ of the UPA government brought theThe Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201918 19agenda of job creation and manufacturing ledgrowth on the policy landscape. This policyincorporates the agenda of creating 10 crorejobs in the manufacturing sector alone withinone decade.Today, two-thirds of s, nearly 80 crores, are below 35 years of age. Gettingwell paying, decent jobs or entrepreneurshipopportunities as they enter working age, istheir number one priority. While a number ofsteps have been taken in this direction in thelast decade, this remains an overriding priority, requiring a lot more to be done. The   will announce aJobs Agenda within 100 days of forming thegovernment. Thisagenda will includethe followingelements1. The N a t i o n a l isc o m m i t t e dto creationof industrialc o r r i d o r sto catalyzeeconomic growth and give a focusedthrust to manufacturing in the country.2. Create 100 new urban clusters aroundexisting small and emerging cities and linkthem with power and transport facilitiesto scale existing economic activities.3. Increase India’s investment rate to38 % to ensure more new investmentsare made to create jobs.4. Improving India’s ‘Ease of DoingBusiness’ ranking from the current 134to 75 within 5 years, by streamlining theprocess for starting a business, gettingvarious permits, easing access to credit,streamlining the tax enforcement system,and various other interventions.5. Create an enhanced framework topromote exports. Waive off all taxes,Central and State, that go into exportedproducts. Put a minimum tariffprotection so that there is an incentive tomanufacture goods in India rather thanimport them.6. The -led UPA government,being fully aware of the importance ofskilling to increase employability set upthe  Skills Development Agencyto coordinate various disparate trainingefforts of different Central governmentministries, State governments, industry,etc. We commit to increasing theresources at its disposal and enhance itsmandate.7. Reform the Apprentice Act, 1961, toencourage more firms to hire apprenticesin their firms, which has proven to be avery effective way of providing “on-thejobtraining” to new employees.8. The Standard Training Assessment andReward (STAR) Scheme set up by theUPA government will be better fundedand a robust monitoring system will beput in place to track the manner in whichskills are imparted and certifications givenat the ground level under this scheme.9. Community colleges stand at thecrossroads of higher education and thereal world. We have begun a programmeto convert 200 existing educationalinstitutions into community colleges.This will be completed within 5 years.10. The    is committedto the creation of new and upgradingof existing Industrial Training Institutes(ITIs). Recognising the need to havequality world-class training methods andinfrastructure, we will introduce incentivesfor Public Private Partnership and engageworld class expertise to ensure our youthare best equipped to take on demandingjobs in today’s globalized world.3. P rotecting theInterests of LabourThe    will extendsocial security to the entire labour class, bothorganised and unorganised.The    has stoodfor the cause and rights of labour. We haveenacted several laws to protect their interestsincluding the Unorganised Workers’ SocialSecurity Act. We will ensure the effectiveimplementations of all such laws.1. The    will ensurehealth insurance as well as pension coverfor this group.2. The    iscommitted to the strictest implementationof Contract Labour (Regulationand Abolition) Act of 1970, to endexploitation of workers and to improvetheir welfare and working conditions.3. We will focusspecially onlabour workingin hazardousindustries.4. Aadhaar isa powerful toolfor protectingthe interests ofmigrant labour,as well as ensuring the smooth flow ofremittances to their families. All migrantlabour will be covered under the Aadhaarprogramme in the next one year, througha special campaign.5. The special needs of labour working inplantations, particularly those relatingto housing, will be addressed throughongoing programmes.6. The Unorganised Workers’ SocialSecurity Act, 2008 has been enacted; thiswill be implemented in letter and spirit.The Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201920 217. We will set up a Commission to explorethe possibility of bringing all LabourLaws under one comprehensive Law.4. R ight to HealthThe    will increasehealth expenditure to 3% of GDP andprovide universal and quality health care forall s.The    has endeavouredto provide quality public health services to allcitizens. Its forward-looking Schemes haveachieved great success. This is reflected in thedecline in the Maternal Mortality Ratio andInfant Mortality Rate. The Janani SurakshaYojana, a schemestarted to encourageinstitutional deliveryhas achieved greatsuccess in increasingthe number ofbeneficiaries from7.3 lakh in 2005-06,to nearly 113 lakhpregnant women in2010-11.1. We were the first party to implementdevelopment policies as human rights. Tostrengthen this framework, we now pledgeto enact a Right to Health to ensure thatall people obtain easily accessible, qualityhealth services, based on a combinationof public provision and social insurance.The new  Health Mission willemphasize both rural and urban health care.2. We will provide for 5 state of theart mobile health care vans in everydistrict, equipped with x-ray and otherequipment, to provide health care checkups including, mammography, bloodtests, etc.3. The    willexpand the Rashtriya Swasthya BimaYojana to enable access to a continuumof comprehensive primary, secondaryand tertiary care.4. The    commitsitself to increasing the InstitutionalDelivery Rate. Maternal and child healthcare will also continue to be a majorfocus. We aim to reduce the InfantMortality Rate and Maternal MortalityRatio drastically.5. Almost 56% of adolescent girls in India areanaemic. Anaemia and malnutrition amongmothers endanger the mother’s health andcauses growth retardation and vulnerabilityto diseases in children. This is not just asocio-economic challenge; it is a politicalchallenge to which the   reaffirms its commitment.6. Almost 60% of open defecation in theworld takes place in India. Poor sanitationis a serious health hazard. We willendeavour to provide a functional toiletin every school and every household.7. There has been a reduction of new HIVinfections in the country by 57%. Weaim to reduce this further and providecomprehensive care and support to allpersons living with HIV/AIDS.8. We will launch focused intervention toimprove the Child Sex Ratio, within anoverall “ Strategy for Care andProtection of the Girl Child” from birthto adolescence.9. Health and Family Welfare Programmeswill be strengthened to achieve a TotalFertility Rate (TFR) of 2.1 between 2017and 2020. Particular attention will be paidto regions which still have a high TFR(above 2.5).10. India’s success in becoming polio-freethrough vaccination will be replicated.Our goal is to ensure universal coverageof routine immunization throughcampaigns and effective monitoring indistricts throughout the country.11. To ensure effective implementationof all health related initiatives, wewill work to strengthen the primaryhealth workforce including AccreditedSocial Health Activists (ASHAs),Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANMs),Male Multipurpose Workers (MMWs),Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) andCommunity Health Officers etc. Wewill work to fill the current vacanciesand improve their competenciesthrough nationwide capacity buildingprogrammes linked to the Health Mission.12. We will create 6o lakh new jobs in thehealth sector by 2020 by trainingand expanding the current teachingprogrammes for healthcare professionals,particularly in the public sectorinstitutions. We will start a three-yearDiploma Course in Public Health.13. Primary healthcare infrastructurewill be strengthenedright upto the pointof the communityhealth centre andcontinuity of carewould be assured.5. E mpowering ScheduledCastes, Scheduled Tribesand Other BackwardClassesThe    will continueto work towards the empowerment of themarginalised sections of society.The principles of equity and inclusion havebeen weaved into the very fabric of the  . It is because of theinitiatives of the   that the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribesand Other Backward Classes have seenThe Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201922 23an improvement in key socio-economicindicators. In fact the annual rate of declinefor poverty in the period between 2004–05and 2009–10 has been much higher thanbetween 1993-94 and 2004-05 for ScheduledCastes and Scheduled Tribes.The    has enactedseveral laws for the weaker sections includingthe Manual Scavengers and their RehabilitationAct, 2013 to push for rehabilitation ofthese families. The Constitution (117thAmendment) Bill 2012 to provide reservationin promotions for Scheduled Castes andScheduled Tribes has been passed by the RajyaSabha. We will continue to fight the deepseatedprejudices,t r a d i t i o n a lhierarchies anddisparities facedby these sections,socially, politicallyand economically.1. The N a t i o n a l iscommitted tofinding a way forward for introducingreservation in education and employmentfor economically weaker sections of allcommunities without in any way affectingexisting reservations for ScheduledCastes, Scheduled Tribes and OtherBackward Classes.2. We now pledge to enact central legislationon the Scheduled Castes and ScheduledTribes Sub Plans so that the developmentof Scheduled Castes and ScheduledTribes can be accelerated to become atpar with other Castes.3. The    willensure the passage of the ScheduledCastes and Scheduled Tribes (Preventionof Atrocities) Amendment Bill, 2013.4. With a strong focus on education andvocational skills, we will endeavour toestablish one Navodaya Vidyalaya typeof school of high standards for weakersections, in every Block of the country.5. We will continue to provide assistanceto fund the cost of education in bothprivate and government institutions forScheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribestudents, with priority to those studentswhose parental income is less than Rs. 6lakh per annum.6. All Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribestudents fulfilling the admission criteriawill be provided with universal access tothe Rajiv Gandhi Research Fellowships.In addition, 1000 overseas scholarshipsfor eligible students will be providedannually.7. Every Scheduled Caste or ScheduledTribe unemployed graduate or postgraduate will be provided with a SkillDevelopment Voucher of Rs. 10,000 topay for the appropriate skill developmentcourse.8. The    has ensuredthe reservation of 4% of procurementfrom small and medium Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe enterprises. Wewill push for strict implementation ofthis norm.9. The   ,recognizing that dalit women are moresocially and economically vulnerable, hasendeavored to work for their upliftmentand welfare and will continue to ensuredignity through economic and socialempowerment.10. We will encourage and support ScheduledCaste and Scheduled Tribe entrepreneursby providing them easy access to creditand other incentives like tax rebates atthe initial stages of establishment oftheir business etc.11. We will focus on development activitiesfor creating social and economicopportunities for Scheduled Tribes. Wewill ensure the stringent implementationof PESA, 1996 and the Forest RightsAct, 2006 to ensure that ScheduledTribes are empowered and brought intothe mainstream.12. The    iscommitted to creating  consensuson affirmative action for ScheduledCastes and Scheduled Tribes in theprivate sector.13. We will take steps to ensure that allreserved posts are filled and a special drivewill be undertaken to fill all the backlogvacancies in reserved posts in governmentand Public Sector Undertakings.14. The    is deeplycommitted to developing a Action Plan for the Development ofScheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes andOther BackwardClasses. There shallbe a special survey,which will beundertaken onceevery five yearsto estimate, onselect developmentindicators, the gapin the developmentof these groups.15. The    willensure that the existing Rajiv Gandhi Fellowship for Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe Candidates will beextended to students belonging to OtherBackward Classes.16. The    willestablish Special Commissions forScheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribesand Other Backward Classes to identifycommunities within each group whichhave not benefited from reservations andother affirmative action programmes andwhich need to be given a special focus.The Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201924 256. Women’s Empowermentand Protection ofChildrenThe    will ensurethe safety and security of our women andchildren. We will provide them equal access tosocial, economic and political opportunities.The    is a party thathas gone beyond the rhetoric and hyperbolerelied on by most parties when it comes tothe empowerment of women and children.The    has enactedseveral women and child oriented Acts,including the Criminal Law (Amendment)Bill, 2013, theSexual Harassmentof Women atWorkplace (Prevention,Prohibition andRedressal) Act, 2013,the Criminal Law(Amendment) Act,2013, Commissionfor Protection ofChild Rights Act,2005, and the Protection of Children fromSexual Offences Act, 2012. We have alsoensured that gender equality and child carefacilities are mainstreamed in governmentschemes like MGNREGA. We will continueto work for the development our women andchildren.1. The    will ensurethat all laws for the welfare of childrenincluding the Child Labour (Prohibitionand Regulation) Act and the Protectionof Children from Sexual Offences Act,2012, will be strictly enforced.2. We will further strengthen and expandthe scope of the  Commissionfor Protection of Child Rights, set up in2007.3. We will also ensure that the strongestpossible action is taken to prevent childtrafficking.4. The quality of the Integrated ChildDevelopment Scheme (ICDS)programme will be vastly improvedand special incentives will be given toAnganwadi workers.5. The    iscommitted to the enactment of theWomen’s Reservation Bill to reserve33 % of all seats in the Lok Sabha, and inall State legislative assemblies for women.6. We will initiate immediate action toformulate a Citizens Charter for Women’sSafety and Security.7. The    has placeda high premium on the education ofwomen. We will continue with this focus,to achieve gender parity in literacy.8. Fast-Track Courts will be establishedwith ‘in-camera’ proceedings facilitiesin State headquarters and in regionalcentres. The purpose of these Courtswill be solely to address crimes againstwomen. Mandatory procedure for therapid conclusion of cases where custodyof children is involved shall be put inplace.9. We will increase the number of girlshostels, particularly in tribal areas andhostels for working women, with day care,to encourage women to become welleducatedand earn their own livelihood.10. We will ensure that all measures are takento make women feel safe and protected.We will expedite such measures as thecreation of functional helplines in allmajor towns and cities and rural areas forprompt grievance redressal for women,exclusive 24-hour transport facilities andgender sensitivity classes for police menand women, particularly in registeringand investigating complaints made bywomen.11. The    will open“One Stop Crisis Centres” for women inall hospitals to provide medical, legal andpsycho-social aid in cases of rape anddomestic violence against women.12. The   , true to itslong-standing history, will take measuresto enable increased participation andreservation for women at all levels withinthe government. We will ensure that atleast 25% of the total police officers, subinspectorsand constables at every policestation in the country will be women,over the next five years. We will ensurethe number of women police stations inthe country goes up from 500 to 2000 inthe next five years.13. The  will earmark atleast 30% of allfunds flowinginto Panchayatsand Nagarpalikasfor developmentof women andchildren and focuson the specialneeds of female agricultural labour andwomen cultivators.14. We will encourage the setting up of“Poorn Shakti Kendras” at block levelto provide a single window mechanismfor awareness, information, access andutilisation of government schemes andprogrammes.15. The    will provideland rights for women especially singlewomen, women-headed households,land for women whose husbands havemigrated away from villages.The Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201926 2716. The    will striveto clear all pending compensations towomen with missing husbands in areas ofunrest and conflict and especially borderareas including providing employment towar widows and their families.17. We will strengthen institutionalarrangements to provide access to credit,training and marketing for women in theunorganised sector in peri-urban andrural areas.18. The    is deeplydistressed with the continued sexualexploitation of tribal girls at variousplaces, suchas hostels,and continuedtrafficking inyoung womenb e l o n g i n gto tribalcommunities.This matterwill receivethe highestpriority and will be taken up with all Stategovernments and special Schemes will beintroduced, like through the Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM) forsecuring their livelihoods.19. The    will workwith women’s Self-Help-Groups for thedistribution of free sanitary napkins foradolescent girls.20. The    believesthat society should be more sensitive tothe rights of the transgender community.This issue will receive separate andcontinued attention.21. Through the NRLM we will providelow interest loans, of upto Rs. 1 lakh, towomen for livelihood activities.7. S afeguarding MinoritiesThe    will focus onaccelerating concrete, sustainable and longtermplans for the welfare of the Nation’sminorities.The    has alwaysbeen at the forefront in promoting Schemesfor the welfare of minorities. A separate anddedicated Ministry of Minority Affairs wasestablished under the -led UPA-Igovernment. Since then many far-reachingprogrammes in various sectors have beenimplemented with significant results.1. Numerous scholarships have beendistributed to children belonging to theminority community. The Corpus of theMaulana Azad Education Foundation hasbeen more than tripled to over Rs 700 crorein an attempt to encourage candidatesfrom the minority communities to pursueopportunities in higher education. Thiswork will be continued so as to ensurethat no child who applies for educationalsupport is denied it at any level.2. ‘Priority Sector Lending’ disbursementfor minorities has steadily increased. Wewill continue to ensure that membersof the minority communities have easyaccess to credit and other incentiveslike tax rebates etc., to encourageentrepreneurship.3. For the effective management of Waqfproperties and in realisation of the specificpromise made in 2009, the ledUPA government became the firstgovernment to pass a law providing clearguidelines to prevent the usurpation andmismanagement of Waqf properties.The    pledges tocontinue with this programme.4. The Prevention of Communal andTargeted Violence (Access to Justiceand Reparations) Bill, 2013, which wasdrafted and introduced by the   will be passed as amatter of priority.5. The -led UPA government hastaken steps to address the conditionsof backward minorities by aiming toprovide them reservation in educationalinstitutions and in governmentemployment. We will pursue this matterclosely in Court and ensure that thepolicy is implemented through properlegislation.6. We will work to create a ready corpus,along the lines of the MaulanaAzad Educational Fund for youngentrepreneurs. Skills developmentprogrammes for minorities which havebeen carried out successfully in variousdistricts, will be implemented across thecountry.7. While much work has been done toimplement the recommendations of theSachar Committee, the   will work tirelessly to ensurethat every single recommendation isreviewed and efforts are made for theirimplementation.8. Youth andStudentAgendaThe   willcontinue to focuson youth capacitybuilding, education,leadership anddevelopment. Opening up the political systemand giving a voice to each and every young will continue to be a priority area.The    believes ouryouth is our biggest asset. In the past decadenot only have we actively encouraged youngleadership and political opportunities for allbut also remained committed to creating anenabling and rewarding environment to buildthe capacity of our youth to take on roles moreactively in our country’s future. We spend morethan Rs. 90,000 crore across various schemesfor the youth, and we will only increase this.The Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201928 29Building the Best Education Systemin the World for our StudentsThe    has beenunequivocal in its emphasis and support forproviding affordable and quality education.We will continue to keep education on thevery top of our development agenda.Education is the backbone of humandevelopment and is vital to ensuring equalsocial, political and economic opportunitiesfor all citizens. We enacted the Right toEducation Act 2009, which provides forfree and compulsory education for childrenbetween the ages of 6 and 14 years. As aresult, enrolmentof children at theprimary educationstage has nowreached nearuniversal levels.1.98 lakh primaryschools and 1.1lakh upper primaryschools have beenconstructed. UnderUPA-I and UPAII,the per capita public expenditure oneducation increased from Rs. 888 in 2004–05to Rs. 2,985 in 2011–12. Our focus will nowbe on improving the quality of education- wewill move from “Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan” to“Shreshth Shiksha Abhiyan.”1. The    willstrengthen the implementation ofthe Right to Education Act to ensurequality learning outcomes, adequateinfrastructure and facilities in schools,regular teacher training and an optimalPupil Teacher Ratio. We will also ensurequality in teacher training by makingsuitable investments and amendments toregulations, wherever required.2. We will enhance focus and resourceson the implementation of the RashtriyaMadhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan, to improvequality of secondary education. We willachieve near universal enrolment insecondary education.3. The    will placea special emphasis on reducing thedrop-out rate particularly in middle andsecondary levels.4. We will establish an independentregulatory mechanism to overseeState and private institutions to ensurestandardisation and quality of education.5. We will support regional and contextspecific curricula as well focus ondeveloping life skills including leadershipbuilding.6. We are committed to the cause of specialeducation. We will strengthen facilitiesfor children with special needs anddisabilities. We will also award priority todeveloping infrastructure for differentlyabledpersons.7. The    will takesystematic steps to address issues relatingto discrimination against students fromthe North East and Jammu and Kashmir.8. We will continue to place a special focuson ensuring educational access to civilstrife affected areas and the North Eastregion.9. To focus on higher education, welaunched the Rashtriya Uchhatar ShikshaAbhiyan (RUSA) to provide strategicfunding to improve college and universityinfrastructure. RUSA will help create 70new universities, provide infrastructure incurrent universities, upgrade autonomouscolleges to Universities, and create a newmodel of general degree colleges andprofessional institutions.10. The    will set upa “ Commission for Students”, abody which will protect and promote theinterests of students. This Commissionwill review Constitutional and legalsafeguards for students, recommendremedial legislative measures, facilitateredressal of grievances and advisethe government on all policy mattersconcerning students.11. The    willcontinue to expand its support toproviding interest-free educations loansto students at all levels especially to theweaker sections of society.12. The    iscommited to exploring the possiblepartnerships with the private sector inthe delivery of education. New PublicPrivate Partnership models will beexplored and appropriate regulatorysystems, accreditation procedures,policies and incentives will be developed,to enable private education providersto take on the challenge of expandingand improving secondary education, inparticular.13.   willestablish a “Youth Commission”,which will be aprofessional anddedicated focalpoint for youthdevelopment in allaspects.14. We will establish a centralised studentsexchange programme to encourage unity.Promoting SportsThe    remainscommitted to ensuring that sportsopportunities are expanded and made moreavailable and accessible to the youth.We will strive to be a Nation where sport inall its forms is promoted and encouraged.1. Due to the UPA-II’s recent efforts, Indiahas been reinstated as a member of theThe Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201930 31Inter Olympic Committee. The   will continueto clean up sports administration. Wewill ensure active involvement of formersportspersons in sports administration.2. The Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan launchedby the -led UPA governmentwill be implemented to ensure highquality sporting facilities in every blockof the country.3. A “ Sports Education University”will be set up to educate students ofexceptional talent. There would be a teamof experts who would be continuouslyscouting fortalent in everysport acrossthe country inthe age-groupof 8-15 years.It will haveworld classcoaches andfacilities.Other Youth IssuesThe    will promotesocial inclusiveness, employability andentrepreneurship development among theyouth.1. The    willprovide a special youth developmentpackage (entrepreneurship/employment)for Left-Wing Extremism affectedareas with special focus on women andScheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.2. We will start a special drive for recruitmentof North East and Jammu & Kashmiryouth in Railways,  Army and otherCentral government departments.3. The    remainscommitted to eradicating the problem ofdrug abuse. A nation-wide assessment ofthe prevalence of this problem will beundertaken. Funding will be adequatelyprovided for drug-rehabilitation centreswhich will be set up in each district.4. The  Service Scheme, launchedby the -led UPA governmentfor graduates, aims to enhance IT literacy,financial literacy, english communicationand other soft skills; to make the youthmore employable. The   is committed to increasingfunding and reach of this Scheme whileprioritising its implementation.5. We will seek to ensure priority todifferently-abled youth with respect toeducation and employment opportunities.6. We will set up government runemployment exchange/ facilitationcenters for youth seeking foreignemployment opportunities. These willhelp curtail middlemen/fraudulentrecruiting agencies. The Ministry ofOverseas  Affairs will be the nodalagency for this.9. R ural Development andPanchayati RajThe    will continueto work progressively to ensure the prosperityof rural India.In the ten years of UPA-I and UPA-II, the ruralareas of the country have seen unprecedentedeconomic development and improvement inquality of life. For the first time in over twodecades, the increase in rural consumption, at18%, has outpaced urban consumption. Ruralpoverty declined at 0.7 percentage pointsper year between 1993-94 and 2004-05. Itdeclined more than three times faster at 2.3percentage points per year in the UPA periodbetween 2004-05 and 2011-12.Farm wages in real terms increasedimpressively after 2004 to reach Rs.184.7per day in 2012-13. Our flagship andhistoric programme, the Mahatma Gandhi Rural Employment GuaranteeAct (MGNREGA) has been a significantcontributor in this; on an average 1 in every4 rural households has sought work underMGNREGA every year.1. All development functionaries at thevillage level who perform vital nationbuildingtasks like Anganwadi workers,Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANMs),Accredited Social Health Activist(ASHA) workers and various others,must have their contributions recognisedin a meaningful manner. The   will ensure that theyare compensated adequately for theirservices and have access to high qualitytraining and decent working conditions.2. The    fulfilled itspromise and implemented the Food Security Act, a statutory guaranteeto ensure adequate quantity and qualityof food at affordable prices to peopleto live their life with dignity. The   will attempt toexpand the focusof the current foodsecurity Schemes toinclude subsidisedpulses and cookingoil for beneficiariesof Antyodaya AnnaYojana.3. The   will implement aUniversal Pension Scheme, for the elderly,destitute, widows and other similargroups (based on certain exclusions).4. We will expand the current PradhanMantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)to ensure that an all-weather road willconnect all habitations with a populationof 125 persons and above.5. To promote effective access to cleandrinking water and water for irrigation,we will set up a legal and institutionalframework, in discussion and withconsensus of States, for water. We willThe Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201932 33also ensure 100% coverage of ruralhabitations for drinking water in the nextfive years.6. We will continue to support Self-Help-Groups (SHGs) and assist the poorto set up small businesses. We will setup more branches of the BharatiyaMahila Bank and women only branchesof other public sector banks. Ourtarget is to ensure the formation of7 crore SHGs by 2019.7. The    will ensure100% modernisation and digitisation ofland records to ensure transparency inland titles.8. The N a t i o n a l wills u b s t a n t i a l l yi n c r e a s eP a n c h a y a tf u n d i n g ,especially ofuntied funds. Wewill also encourage Panchayats to raisetheir own resources so that Panchayatrepresentatives, in consultation with Gramand Ward Sabhas, can themselves decidehow and on what to spend their money.9. We will set up a “ PanchayatiRaj Commission”, with branches in eachState and Union Territory, so thata. Probity and transparency is ensuredin the functioning of Panchayats andtheir elected representatives;b. Panchayati Raj functions in line withthe Constitution and the laws of theland, especially in tribal areas coveredby Panchayat Extension to ScheduledAreas Act (PESA);c. Gram Sabhas are strengthened andlegally mandated to secure responsibleand responsive local government;d. The individual citizen is empowered tosecure, through the local Panchayat,his or her rights and entitlements andother benefits provided for in theConstitution.10. A griculture and FarmerWelfareThe    will continueto provide an impetus to agricultural growth,productivity and incomes. We will also stayfocused on providing all possible support forour farmers, in particular women and smalland marginal farmers.The    has institutedschemes like the Rashtriya Krishi VikasYojana. As a result of these measures, theagriculture GDP growth went up from 2.6%(under the NDA) to 3.1% under UPA-I andfurther to 4% under UPA-II.1. The historic decision by the ledUPA government to allow ForeignDirect Investment in multibrand retailwill transform the agrarian economy asit will create a beneficial value chain fromfarm-to-fork, creating rural infrastructurefor sorting, grading, packing, cold storagefacilities and ware housing. It will ensurethat the farmer gets a much higher valuefor her or his produce.2. We will continue to nurture PublicPrivate Partnerships for increasinginvestments in value-chains, cold storagefacilities, grading and standardisation,quality certification and warehouses. Thiswill greatly aid in increasing agricultureproductivity and exports.3. We will add 1 crore hectares to irrigatedarea by completing the radical WaterReforms Agenda of the 12th Plan, whichis based on Irrigation ManagementTransfer to Water Users Associations offarmers. This will ensure Gross IrrigatedArea crosses 10 crore hectares in India.4. The current water use efficiency inirrigation is 40%. The   will actively support moreefficient water use technologies includingreuse and recycling of water. We willcomplete the historic aquifer-mappingand the groundwater managementprogramme launched by UPA-II overthe next five years, to ensure sustainableutilisation of groundwater to securethe livelihoods of lakhs of our farmers,particularly in regions where groundwaterdepletion has taken place.5. Small and marginal farmers own morethan half the country’s total cattle andbuffalo. However, only 12% of the totalexpenditure on agriculture is on livestockdevelopment. The   will place a special emphasis onlivestock, fisheries, opening of veterinaryschools and centres, fodder developmentthrough animal husbandry programmesand schemes like MGNREGA.MGNREGA will also be harnessed tosupport the construction of poultryshelters and water bodies for fisheries.6. The  will increase spendingto ensure access andquality in agricultureeducation, includingincreasing theamount for andnumber of postmatricscholarshipsand research fellowships for veterinarystudents.7. The    willincrease coverage of crop insuranceschemes, particularly among the smalland marginal farmers and non-loaneefarmers. Settlement of claims on time,better crop yield estimation to determinepremiums etc., and involvement ofprivate sector will be other areas of focus.8. The    willallocate special funds for agriculturalresearch to develop new technologiesThe Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201934 35for disease management of crops andlivestock, high-yielding-varieties ofcrops, etc.9. The    willpromote resource conservationtechnologies and agriculture practiceslike integrated farming, organic farmingand develop wastelands for dry landfarming.10. We will cover 250 lakh hectares aswatersheds, as part of the dramaticallyreformed Integrated WatershedManagement Programme launched byUPA-II.11. There arelakhs offamilies in ourcoastal beltsthat dependon fishingfor theirlivelihood. Toenhance theirwelfare, a newMinistry of Fisheries will be establishedand all steps will be taken to furtherenhance their livelihood security.12. The   ,honouring the commitment made in the2009 Manifesto, enacted the Right toFair Compensation and Transparencyin Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation andResettlement Act, 2013. The   will ensure fast andfair implementation of the Act suchthat farmers, landowners and livelihoodlosers get adequate compensation fortheir acquired land.13. The    has morethan doubled the Minimum SupportPrices (MSP) for farmers for wheat andpaddy from 2004-05 to 2013-14. The MSPfor other cereals increased three-fold. Wewill continue our endeavour to providehigher MSP to increase profitability ofagriculture for our farmers.14. The    willprovide concessional loans to groups/collectives of small and marginal farmersand women farmers upto Rs. 5 lakh toenable them to gain better access toinputs and services.15. The    will striveto lower interest rates for farmers toensure they are able to access extensionservices and agriculture inputs like seeds,water, fertilizers etc.11. A ccelerating Industrialand ManufacturingGrowhThe    commits to10% growth in manufacturing and an increasein contribution of manufacturing sector’sshare to 25% of GDP. We will also supportrapid acceleration in exports.We are aware that the deceleration ininvestment in manufacturing has been aserious concern. We propose to take strongmeasures to promote the manufacturingindustry.1. Utmost priority will be given to theimplementation of the Manufacturing Policy to enhance theshare of manufacturing in GDP to 25% by2022, which will be achieved by an annualgrowth rate for the sector in the range of12-14%. We are committed to creating Investment ManufacturingZones as greenfield integrated industrialtownships to make India a manufacturinghub of the world. 16 new world-classcities have already been notified acrossthe country.2. The    iscommitted to the creation of industrialcorridors to catalyse economic growth andgive a focused thrust to manufacturing inthe country. The Delhi-Mumbai IndustrialCorridor has decisively moved into theimplementation phase. Conceptualplanning of the Bengaluru-MumbaiEconomic Corridor, Chennai-BengaluruIndustrial Corridor and Amritsar-KolkataIndustrial Corridor has been completedand work for implementation of theseCorridors will start soon.3. Special emphasis will be given forenhancing the competitiveness ofmanufacturing. We will encourage theallotment of land from existing landbanks for priority sectors to provide animpetus to manufacturing.4. A patent pool will be created which willensure that the  small and mediumenterprises are able to access world-classtechnology at affordable cost.5. The    willintroduce the Goods and Services TaxBills and a new Direct Tax Code Bill inParliament and ensure they are enactedwithin one year. Wewill also announce aJobs Agenda, with afocus on attractingnew investmentsfor job creation,within 100 daysof governmentformation.6. We will endeavourto create a stable and predictablebusiness environment. We will ensurethat the interface between governmentand industry is simplified and will usherin comprehensive regulatory changes inthis regard. This will include optimisingthe use of electronic platforms andminimising human interface whereverpossible. Redundant procedures will beweeded out and the E-biz Project will beimplemented across the country, whichwill ensure ‘single window electronicclearances’ platform for all investors,embracing in its fold all regulatoryapprovals of the Central and Stategovernments.The Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201936 377. The    willcontinue to pay special attention toindustries in the North East. It will alsowork to establish better connectivity,collection centres and market linkages forthese areas and provide special incentivesfor entrepreneurs from the region.8. The    willcome out with a transparent policy fordevelopment of natural resources andhave a special purpose vehicle for this,which will be responsible for judiciousallocation, striking a balance betweenpresent requirements and future demands.It will also ensure that an independentr e g u l a t o rmonitors theprocess ofsuch allocation.9. The N a t i o n a lC o n g r e s sr e c o g n i z e sthe needfor creatingflexibilities in the labour market,especially in the export-oriented industry,given the cyclical nature of demand. The   is committedto protecting the interests of labourthrough more progressive labour laws.10. The policies to encourage foreign directinvestment pursued by the -ledUPA Government ensured that Indiaremained amongst the top 3 investmentdestinations globally. Over the last 4years, India received foreign investmentof US$ 175 billion. The   is committed to sustaining aninvestment climate which is welcomingand supportive of Foreign DirectInvestment.11. The    willstrengthen multilateral trade systems andinvestment flows for future prosperity.The -led UPA government hasembarked on a path of greater economicintegration. The trade in goods andservices has exceeded US$ 1 trillion andwe will ensure that this gets doubledwithin a period of 5 years.12. InfrastructureThe    is of thefirm belief that infrastructure will serve asthe backbone of India’s growth. We pledgeto spend $1 trillion on upgrading India’sinfrastructure in the coming decade.TransportIndia is growing very rapidly and transportis a foundational pillar of that growth. The Railways is the world’s largest railnetwork and currently carries 822.4 crorepeople a year. During the UPA government,the total goods carried by the railways doubledto 1 billion tonnes. The -led UPAgovernments have built or upgraded 17,394km of highways. There has been a ten-foldincrease in investment in road constructionin rural areas. We will continue to investin creating an extensive and world-classtransportation network which will connectpeople across the country.1. The    will launcha “ Road Transport SafetyProgramme”. Road Accidents will behalved within five years by strong willedpolitical commitment to this Programme.The Programme will make every possibleeffort to change the road safety culturewhile establishing clear road safety norms.2. The    recognizesthat the  Railways is the lifeline ofthe Nation and is committed to railwaymodernisation. We will ensure effectiveimplementation of the recommendationsof the Sam Pitroda Committee.3. The    will ensurethat all million-plus cities are covered byHigh Speed Rail.4. We have begun work on the Western andEastern Dedicated Freight Corridors,which will revolutionise freight, transportin India, making it more efficient. The   is committedto ensuring these projects are completedin a time-bound manner.5. We have over the last decade, used thePublic Private Partnership model to unveilworld-class airports in Delhi, Mumbai,Hyderabad and Bangalore and theAirports Authority of India has upgradedseveral others. As the demand for airtravel is increasing tremendously, we willupgrade and create new infrastructure forair travel across the country.6. The    will ensureadequate funding and timely developmentof Regional Rapid Transit Systems.The work of preparation of FeasibilityStudies of Regional Rapid Transit System(RRTS) corridors for the three prioritizedcorridors Delhi-S o n i p a t - Pa n i p a t ,D e l h i - G u r g a o n -Rewari-Alwar, Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut isalready being done.We will ensure theseare fast-tracked.7. We are committedto investing inand upgrading thelogistics, infrastructure and developmentof the port sector in India. We willcontinue to work in this direction.8. The    willemphasise development of India’s inlandwaterways, which totals about 14,500 kmsin length, along with coastal shipping.We will work to set up terminals at majorports and providing adequate road and railconnectivity to inland water and coastalterminals and non-major coastal ports.EnergyIndia’s power generation capacity more thandoubled to 2.34 lakh MW over the pastThe Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201938 39decade. To promote equitable and inclusiveaccess to energy, we have recently increasedthe number of subsidised cooking gascylinders per household to 12 per year. The   will continue toenable the provision of clean, efficient andaffordable energy for all.1. The    iscommitted to the establishment of aclearly defined policy for fair, transparentequitable and time bound developmentof natural resources. The   will immediately put in place aSpecial Purpose Vehicle for this which willbe responsible for a judicious allocation,of resources on the basis of usage andnot arbitrarily,while strikinga balanceb e t w e e np r e s e n trequirementsand futured e m a n d s .We will alsoensure that ani n d e p e n d e n tregulator monitors the process of naturalresource allocation, in a manner that bestserves the interests of the Nation.2. We will effectively implement the Mission on Energy Efficiency toimprove energy efficiency in all areas ofthe economy including power, transport,urban housing, consumer goods and inrural housing.3. We will work to ensure greater access toelectricity; 100% access in urban fromcurrent 94% and 90% access in ruralareas from current 67.3% under the RajivGandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana(RGGVY).4. We are mindful of the fact that whilewe have worked to increase access toelectricity, its availability remains anarea of concern. The   will work to improve the qualityand unit consumption of electricity inrural areas.5. Women being the main energy usersand primary energy suppliers are worstaffected by restricted LPG supply. Therestill exists a strong disparity betweenurban and rural areas. We need to workeffectively to increase household accessto LPG and kerosene, especially theavailability to rural households.6. We will give a new thrust to new andrenewable energy, including hydel, solarand nuclear energy.7. We will ensure accelerated implementedof the Jawaharlal Nehru  SolarMission and launch a “ WindEnergy Mission”.13. U rban DevelopmentThe    affirms itscommitment to creating inclusive cities,revamping urban governance, increasinglow-income housing, and making largeinvestments in infrastructure.With the 74th Amendment to India’sConstitution devolving power to urbanlocal bodies, and through the JawaharlalNehru  Urban Renewal Mission(JNNURM), we have given a major impetusto urban development in India.30 crore s currently live in towns andcities. Within 20-25 years, another 30 crorepeople will get added to this. Recognising thechallenges of urbanisation ahead, the   is committed to adoptinga proactive approach to address them.1. The    will ensurethat Mayors and Municipal Chairpersonshave fully functional powers, so that theycan operate as Chief Executives Officersof cities with executive powers andresponsibilities and not just ceremonialpositions. We will also increase the tenureof Mayors.2. Urban constituencies are rapidly growingin population and the disparity betweenconstituencies is increasing. Thisundermines the principle of equality ofvote and also results in under-franchiseof urban areas. We will ensure this issueis revisited so that constituencies can beadjusted to reflect population changes.3. JNNURM was a landmark initiativeundertaken by the -ledgovernment; it put the urban agendacentrestage with major investments inurban infrastructure. We also launcheda revamped JNNURM-II with morefunding and more powers to localgovernments. JNNURM-II is givingpriority to the strengthening of human andinstitutional capabilities, local planningand improvementin governance. Wewill continue toimplement this withvigour and focus toensure better sewagefacilities, roads andmulti-modal publictransport.14. HousingThe    will continueto work towards providing affordable andquality housing for all sections1. The Indira Awaas Yojana will be expandedto cover all poor rural households.Financial assistance for this will includemoney to not only construct a puccahouse but also individual sanitary toiletsand drinking water connections.2. For urban areas, the Rajiv Awaas Yojanawill be expanded to cover all poor urbanhouseholds. The Scheme is expected toThe Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201940 41cover 250 cities by the end of the 2017.Funds have already been released to162 cities for undertaking preparatoryactivities under Slum Free City PlanningScheme. Our priority will be time-boundimplementation of this initiative.3. We will endeavour to ensure a Right toHomestead for all poor households.4. We will endeavour to ensure Title Deedsare given to those who have been livingon lands for more than two decades.15. EnvironmentThe  is committedto sustainabledevelopment in itstrue spirit. We willcontinue to accordthe highest priorityto environmentalprotection andto ensure that allpeople in India have the right to a cleanenvironment, which secures their health,livelihood and nutritional well-being.The    has alwaysprioritised conservation of our environment. It was Smt. Indira Gandhiwho raised the importance of this agendaas the only visiting Head of State at the UNConference on Human Environment, 1972.The    has enactedvarious laws for environmental protection,including the  Green Tribunal Act,2010.1. The    will bringa Bill to set up a  EnvironmentalAppraisal and Monitoring Authority(NEAMA) - a professional agencyto conduct rigorous and timeboundenvironmental appraisals andrecommend environmental clearances,where appropriate, in a time-bound andtransparent manner.2. We will put water conservation at the heartof our programmes for agriculture, ruraland urban development. This will be doneby focusing all current programmes onaugmenting water through decentralizedsystems, conserving water through allmeans and promoting recycling and reuseof water in all sectors. Water is a publicright, but also a public responsibility.We believe that while pricing of watermust ensure that users internalise ethicsof conservation, it is also imperativethat it be sustainable and affordable.We will promote these principles in allour programmes for water and wastemanagement.3. The    will takeup the cleaning of rivers on a largescale. The  Ganga River BasinAuthority has begun the ambitious taskof cleaning the Ganga River. We will usesimilar models of creating empowered,well-funded agencies to clean othermajor rivers in the country.4. An overwhelming number of women,especially in rural India still use pollutingbiomass for cooking, which puts anunbearable health burden on them. The   is committedto providing clean cooking fuel acrossthe country in an accelerated manner inorder to address this.5. We will launch “Green Accounts” by 2016-17, to ensure thatthe costs of environmental degradationare clearly reflected in India’s accounts. We will also develop indicatorsthat will provide data to the public on thestate of our natural resources.6. We will engage tribal and forest-dwellingcommunities more centrally in forestmanagement, and ensure they getbenefits from forest produce, includingbamboo and other non-timber forestproduce. We will ensure that revenuesfrom forest-based activities, includingfrom wildlife tourism, are shared withlocal communities. This will serve as abedrock for making forest conservationmore durable and effective.7. We will continue to implement the variousmissions under the  Action Planon Climate Change with purpose anddetermination.8. The -led government launchedthe Jawaharlal Nehru  SolarMission under which we set the ambitioustarget of deploying 20,000 MW ofgrid connected solar power by 2022.We will ensure this target is met wellin advance.9. We will also launch a major new “Mission on Wind Energy” to harnessthe power of this clean and renewablesource of energy, which has tremendousuntapped potential in India.10. India is one of the world’s megabiodiverse countries. We will continueto give the highestpriority to protectingthis biodiversity.11. We will continueto strongly advanceand protect India’sinterests in interclimate andother environmentalnegotiations.16. Innovation,Information andCommunicationTechnologyThe    will give arenewed thrust to use of Information andCommunication Technology (ICT).Under the   ’sleadership, the country is moving towardstransformation through ‘Democratisation ofInformation’. Efforts are underway to useICT tools to herald transparency, efficiency,The Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201942 43accountability and accessibility to create moreinclusive and responsive structures, whichare in tune with the needs of 21st centuryIndia. In fields such as agriculture, financialservices, commerce, education and health,this ICT-led Democratisation of Informationis revolutionising service delivery, citizeninterface and accountability throughinnovative practices. New tools under thiswill be the biggest game changer for bringingabout larger systems reform.1. The    will ensurethat all  residents have a uniqueAaadhar number. This will serve as aproof of identity and proof of residence.It will also enable access to services (likeopening a bankaccount) for avast majorityof s.2. The N a t i o n a l isc o m m i t t e dto using theAapka PaisaAapka Haath platform for all governmentprogrammes. Direct Benefit Transfer willensure time-bound delivery of benefitsat the individual’s doorstep, and removecorruption and leakages.3. The    willincrease the annual expenditure onscience and technology to at least 2 %of GDP. This has to come from bothgovernment and industry. Steps will betaken to encourage the corporate sectorto invest in Research and Development.4. The    willconnect all 2.5 lakh Gram Panchayatswith high-speed broadband connectivitywithin 18 months, with a view ofimproving public delivery mechanism.The vision is to transform governanceand service delivery in areas such ashealth, education and agriculture, andunleash local innovation capacity.5. We will ensure the passage of theElectronic Delivery of Service Bill 2011.We will, in accordance with the Bill, workto effectively deliver all public services(like passports, ration cards and drivinglicenses) electronically.6. We will work to establish a RapidlyDeployable Multi-Protocol WirelessCommunication system; interoperableacross all the services engaged in disastermanagement.7. We will ensure effective implementationof the India Inclusive Innovation Fundso that innovative enterprises canprofitably, scalably, and competitivelyengage citizens at the bottom of theeconomic pyramid. We recognize theneed for grassroots innovation and willensure this initiative is well funded.8. We currently import popular brandedhardware in the IT sector. We will givespecial tax incentives for setting upmanufacturing for such products inIndia.17. F ighting CorruptionThe    re-emphasizesit’s commitment to better delivery of serviceswhile eliminating corruption and leakages.The    gave thepeople of India the Right To Information(RTI). The RTI has been our most powerfulweapon in the fight against corruption. Fewgovernments have had the courage to enactlegislation that rendered their processesmore transparent and open to scrutiny. Inrecognition of a widespread public concernover the issue of corruption we passed theLokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013.With the passage of the Right to InformationAct, 2005 the   empowered the people with the biggest toolto fight corruption and ensure transparencyof public service delivery systems. The recentlandmark Whistleblowers Protection Act,2014 is another step in our efforts to createa society free of corruption. The   will give the highest priorityto the passage of the following Bills1. The Right of Citizens for Time BoundDelivery of Goods and Services andRedressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011has the potential to be the second RTI.We will ensure its passage. Redressalof public grievances at the grassrootslevel within a specified period of time isnecessary to ensure good governance.2. Prevention of Bribery of ForeignPublic Officials and Officials of PublicInter Organizations Bill 2011to criminalise bribes offered by foreignofficials and organisations.3. The Prevention of Corruption(Amendment) Bill, which enlarges thedefinition of taking a bribe and coveringcommercial organizations.4. The Public Procurement Bill, 2012regulates public procurement by allMinistries andDepartments of theCentral government,Central Public SectorEnterprises andbodies controlledby the Centralgovernment toensure transparency,and fair andequitable treatment of bidders. Thiswill promote competition and enhanceefficiency in procurement processes.18. G overnance ReformsThe    will give thehighest priority to ensuring accessibility andtransparency in governance systems.The    will ensurethat the recommendations of the secondAdministrative Reforms Commission areimplemented in letter and spirit and monitoredat every step.The Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201944 45Electoral ReformsWe will ensure appropriate electoral reformsto make the political process more transparentand accountable.The    has alwaysdemonstrated its steadfast commitment toelectoral reforms. This includes strengtheningthe legal and judicial framework fordisqualifying those convicted of specifiedcrimes, disqualifying persons convicted ofcrimes against women and weaker sectionsand disqualifying those who subvert theintegrity of the electoral process.1. The    is fullyin favourof a specialm o n i t o r i n gsystem for timelydisposal of allcases involvingelections, fori n t r o d u c i n gt r a n s p a r e n c yin financing ofpolitical activitiesand in expandingstate funding for elections.2. The    willcontinue its efforts to enact the Women’sReservation Bill to ensure one-thirdreservation for women in Parliament andState legislatures.Police ReformsThe    will continuethe process of police modernisation. We willensure our police forces are well-trained andsensitive to the needs of the citizens.The    believes thatpolice administration must become moreprogressive and sensitive to the needs ofpeople, particularly the poor and the weakersections of society. Many recommendationshave been made from time to time. TheJudiciary has also made suggestions. We willaccord the highest priority to instituting thesereforms.Legal and Judicial ReformsWe will bring in a new wave of far reaching legaland judicial reforms aimed at transformingthe current legal system.The    considers anindependent judicial system as a corner stoneof our Constitutional democracy and theguardian of the rights and liberties of ourpeople and the values of our Constitution.A sound judicial system is also central to oureconomic growth and social transformation.In the last ten years, UPA-I and UPA-II havedelivered the largest and fastest expansionof our legal and judicial system ever in ourhistory. The government has produced a clearroad map for judicial reform and established a Mission for Justice System Deliveryand a  Court Management SystemsCommittee housed in the Supreme Court andoperating under its auspices. The funding ofthe judicial system, including through fundsmade available by the Finance Commission,has witnessed a quantum increase. The numberof judges increased by almost 50%. Fast-trackcourts have been continued and supported.There has been significant investment inimproving the infrastructure and the workingconditions of judges. Judicial and legaleducation has been substantially expanded.For the first time in decades, pendency ofcases has begun to come down even as newfilings have been going up. In the 2014-2019period, the    willbring in a new wave of far reaching legal andjudicial reforms aimed at transforming thecurrent legal system.Protection of Human Rights1. The    remainscommitted to the resolute defence ofhuman rights in India consistent with ourConstitution and with the interlaw and covenants.2. The    will enacta law to ensure that consensual sexualrelations between adults of the same-sex,are not criminalised.Judicial Appointments3. The    hasintroduced a Judicial Appointments Billin Parliament establishing a new methodof appointing judges through a JudicialCommission. The Bill will be enactedafter consultation and consensus buildingover the mechanisms proposed in theBill.4. We will support all initiatives to makethe higher and lower judiciaries trulyrepresentative of the diversity of oursociety, especially with respect to gender,caste, religion and region. This will bedone in consultation with and with theguidance of the Chief Justice of India andhis/her companion judges and withoutderogation from the independence ofthe judiciary.JudicialAccountability5. The -ledUPA governmenti n t r o d u c e dthe JudicialAccountability Billto bring about moretransparency in theappointment ofjudges. We shall makeevery effort for the enactment of this billat the earliest.Reducing Delays6. The   government will support all measurestaken by the judiciary to improve courtmanagement so as to ensure quick andtimely disposal of cases. A strategy will bedeveloped for disposing of long delayedcases. Due consideration will be given toexpanding use of fast-track courts.Access to Justice7. The    willcontinue and strengthen legal aid forThe Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -201946 47the indigent. Additionally, we will alsoestablish a cadre of public defenderswho will assist indigent litigants fromdifferent social backgrounds.8. We will continue to promote andstrengthen Gram Nyayalayas across thecountry.19. I nternal SecurityThe    will continueto deal firmly with internal security threats.The    has always giventhe highest priority to internal security. Overthe last few years, spending has been increased,intelligence hasbeen strengthenedand more personnelhave been recruitedin police andparamilitary forces.As a result, overallincidence of crimehas reduced. Wewill continue topursue our internal security agenda withdetermination.1. The    recognisesthe fundamental need to give a senseof security to every . It vows tomobilize all the resources of the Stateto maintain law and order and providemaximum possible security to all s,against both external and internal threats.2. We will ensure that our police forces arefully equipped with the modern weaponsand technology. Deployment of specialistbattalions and recruitment of additionalpersonnel will also be pursued.3. We will continue to address the challengeof Left Wing Extremism with a firm hand.We will strengthen the numbers, equipmentand infrastructure for our security forcesposted in these areas, even as we continue topursue a development agenda to empowerthe people in these areas.20. D efence and Welfare ofEx-ServicemenThe    is committedto rapid modernisation of our defenceforces. India’s security preparedness will bebased on a comprehensive security doctrinethat combines conventional and strategicmeasures.1. The continued and rapid modernisationof our Defence Forces is imperative. The   shall ensurethat this process of procuring the fineststate-of-the-art equipment is carried outin an atmosphere of efficiency and fulltransparency.2. India has emerged as one of the world’slargest importers of defence equipment;it is thus imperative to encourageindigenous manufacturing in everyway. This will also generate substatialemployment. To this end, we shallwork towards giving a fresh impetus toupgrading our existing manufacturingcapabilities while creating new avenuesfor expanding military capability.3. The    has alwaysgiven the highest priority to the welfare ofEx-Servicemen and their families. One ofthe first achievements of the first  -led UPA governmentwas the creation of the Department ofEx-Servicemen’s Welfare. In pursuanceof our continued commitment, the   led UPA-II has nowfulfilled the long-standing demand ofOne Rank-One Pension, a key campaignpromise of the   in 2009. This will bring tremendous reliefto the families of Ex-Servicemen.4. A “ Commission forEx-Servicemen” will be established toprovide a further impetus to programmesdesigned for the welfare of their familiesand expand opportunities for them inNation building and other productiveactivities.5. On the strategic front India will maintaina credible deterrence and second strikecapability. We shall continue the missileprogramme to meet potential threats inthe region.21. F oreign PolicyThe    is committedto the articulation and implementation of arobust and dynamic foreign policy.The    remainscommitted to building peaceful, stable andmutually beneficial relations with all majorpowers and all our Asian neighbours.1. India will continue to benefit from globalopportunities and contribute to worldwideefforts in creating and managinginstitutions to deal with challengeslike climate change and sustainabledevelopment, non-proliferation,inter trade and cross-borderterrorism.2. The    will striveto mobilize support for India’s permanentmembership in the UN Security Council.3. Global Terrorismmust be combattedwith determinationand cooperation.We will be engagedin creating a robustframework ofintelligence sharing,cutting out finacialflows to terroristoutfits, and stopping money laundering,to address the issue of terrorism.4. India has emerged as a critical bridgebetween the developed world and thedeveloping world, along with Brazil,China and South Africa. At the same timewe have our own unique position thatcombines the cumulative heritage of Non-Aligned-Movement and its advocacy offreedom for African countries and steadysupport for Palestine. We will continueto support the goodwill nurtured fordecades amongst socialist countries.The Detailed Act ion Plan2014 -2019485. We will work to strengthen the SouthAsian Association for RegionalCooperation (SAARC) framework andendeavour to meaningfully realise a SouthAsian economic community, as economicengagement is critical to realising the truepotential of this region.6. We expect to proceed with our mutualefforts with China to work throughestablished instruments towards aresolution of differences of perceptionabout the border and the Line of ActualControl (LAC), even as our economiccooperation and multi-lateral cooperationcontinue to grow.7. On Pakistan we will encourage the newgovernment’s stated position to improverelations with India but calibrate thedialogue consistent with delivery onaccountability for 26/11 as well asdismantling of the infrastructure ofterrorism on Pakistani soil.8. On Sri Lanka, we will engage withthat country to ensure that the Tamilspeakingpeople and other minoritieshave full equality and equal rights underthe law. We will continue to press theGovernment of Sri Lanka to implementthe 13th Amendment and createautonomous provinces, especially theprovinces of the North and the East.We will continue to extend all possiblehumanitarian and development assistanceto enable the Tamil-speaking people andother minorities to rebuild their lives in adignified manner. We will work with othercountries, to prevail upon Sri Lanka toensure a credible, objective, time-boundinquiry into allegations of human rightsviolations and excesses committed by theSri Lankan forces during the concludingphases of the operations against theLTTE.9. For Afghanistan, we believe the real threatis not within but from terrorism frombeyond its borders. If the peace processremains Afghan owned and Afghandriven, we will work to support it.10. Protecting s overseas fromexploitation or threats will remaina paramount concern of the  .For the   , a Manifesto is more than a catalogueof promises and pledges to be forgotten after elections are over.It is an agenda for governance to be followed diligently and meticulously.It is an agenda for good governance on which progress must be reportedto the people of the country, regularly, in a transparent manner.It is in this spirit that the -led UPA government has been releasinga “Report to the People” every year. This will continue.The 2014 Lok Sabha elections will offer stark choices.On the one side is the    with its long track record ofachievements and accomplishments, with its vision and values bequeathed to itby a most remarkable generation of s led by Mahatma Gandhi.On the other side is an ideology of hate, bigotry and prejudice, an ideology thatnegates the very idea of India that has been cherished by us for centuries.On the one side is the   , which celebrates and rejoicesin the multitude of diversities of India.On the other side is an ideology that seeks to impose uniformityin the name of unity.A vote for the    is a vote for fulfilling the aspirationsof the youth of our nation, for ensuring that women lead a life of dignity.Economic growth, social harmony, empowerment of weaker sections andstrengthening of democratic institutions have to all go hand-in-hand.It is only the    that will, by its very character,ensure that this happens.The Detailed Act ion Plan2014-2019 An Appeal